Oh, yes.
Oh, you are muted. Okay. I just said Morning Lan and hoa.
We can see you there. Good morning.
Morning, Ingrid.
Right, I think we will kick into it.
So we will open for public session
and we invite our very first submitters for the day,
New Zealand Wine Growers, um, or New Zealand wine.
So, uh, if you would like to come
and join us at the table, uh, welcome
to the select committee this morning.
You have 20 minutes with us, so, um, we will hand it over
to you for some introductions and opening remarks
and to talk us through your submission.
But do take it as read
and we'll open it up to the floor for,
uh, questions afterwards.
But, uh, we also do have some members joining us on Zoom
today, throughout the day as well.
So, uh, we can see Cameron Luxon just joined there, so look,
we'll hand it over to you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, my name is Dr.
Ed Massey, GM Sustainability at New Zealand Wine Growers.
And this is Steve Wilkes, director
of Wilkes Resource Management, a grape grower
and member of our Environment Committee who, uh,
provides advice for New Zealand Wine Growers Board
on Environmental matters.
New Zealand wine growers represents all
1400 commercial grape growers
and wine companies in New Zealand.
Uh, together our industry produces over 2.1 billion in
annual export returns,
and we are committed to sustainability,
protecting the places that that make our renowned wines.
The wine industry is New Zealand's largest horticultural
industry by area.
With over 44,000 hectares planted in 10
regions across the country.
Marlborough alone contains 30,000 hectares of vineyard.
The wine industry strongly supports the government's intent
to create a simpler
and more predictable resource management system
that makes it easier to get things done while safeguarding
the environment and human health.
These are non-negotiables.
However, we do have concerns with several of the
proposed changes that will potentially impact our members
that may have unintended consequences and add cost.
We also acknowledge the government's draft proposals on
local government reform,
and note that the successful implementation of any changes
to the resource management system require sufficient
expertise to remain in region.
This expertise is fundamental to the successful delivery
of a certified of a simplified effective planning system.
Context is important too.
Our members have been operating their businesses in an
environment where costs have been rising across the board.
So it's important that any regulatory intervention,
whether on these bills
or others, do not add unnecessary compliance costs.
Further, our members get certainty
where there are clear rules of engagement.
And when their representative organizations have fair
and equal access to engage in public processes.
We strongly consider that one set of rules has to apply for,
for all, and
that no one stakeholder group has special status
where the rules should apply differently to them.
Of course, UA as partners
will have their own views reflected in regional planning
processes, and that is right and proper
and consistent with good governance in New Zealand.
There are several, um,
really good points about the proposed bills.
We are strongly supportive of the use
of national directives.
These national, uh,
these national instruments will provide increased
certainty for our members.
Provided there is sufficient flexibility for councils
that are suitable for local context.
Such national directives must be prepared
and established in a, in a timely manner.
We are also supportive of environmental limits
and appropriate circumstances
provided that these limits scientifically robust
and provide for regional context where appropriate.
Uh, by way of an example, uh, if national limits
or environmental limits were set for water clarity that were
to be applied across the board.
In Marlborough alone,
we've got our two main irrigation sources for from rivers,
the arbitrary and the white arrow.
The white arrow is like what you'd imagine a typical clear
running stream river.
The arbitrary by virtue of its geology,
has got a significantly elevated sediment loading
and there's nothing you can do about it.
It's not a land use consequence, it's just the
geological concept.
Con, what's the word I'm after? Context?
Context, Yeah. Sorry.
If we, if we have
to meet in Marlborough a predetermined clarity level,
we won't be able to do that on the arbitrary.
We just can't. It's impossible. Good example.
We also support, um, the increased certainty
provided by the, uh, 35 year maximums
for a water water permit.
It's that certainty that creates the environment for,
for continued investment over a long period.
And, and that's really essential for our industry members.
We also, uh, acknowledge that the increased, um,
threshold for freshwater farm planning from five
to 50 hectares, um, is a, is a really good way
to acknowledge, um, the low risk, um, to freshwater po
by viticultural land use.
And we're very supportive of this change taken together.
These changes will help, we will help provide certainty
for our members and help cut costs while simplifying the
overall regulatory picture.
Really good things. Moving on to our key areas of concern.
Allocation of fresh water is fundamental
to the ongoing operation and expansion of the wine industry.
While the national direction that will set out the design
of any allocation system is yet to be developed,
it's crucial that local level considerations
and catchment context are adequately provided for.
We have another, uh, example 2014,
I think it was when national directors came out on how
to set environmental low flows in rivers.
Uh, sitting at a workshop run
by MFE staff in Nelson and Marlborough.
We mentioned to them that your 5%
of your seven day mean annual low flow is a, is a track,
for example, is a little bit impossible
to work in the Malborough context where anything south
of the wire out is an ephemeral.
So our water, our water resources,
our rivers naturally just run dry through summer.
Uh, I was in the high country in the Molesworth over the
weekend and we were swimming in a water hole
that was a meter deep, 200 meters downstream.
There is no water. So if we've got these national
directives, they have to allow for a regional context so
that we are not locked into something.
Our members aren't locked into something
that just can't be met.
New Zealand wine growers considers that efficient use
of resources should be incentivized as much as possible.
And in particular, the methods
and policies do not penalize those
that are already operating at close
to environmental optimums.
In terms of our water demand for our members
and the efficiency of of our industry on a daily basis,
viticulture requires something in the order of 42% only
of the water that pastoral farming
or processed crops require.
If you look at an annual demand, we are less than 25%.
So on a, on a 20 hectare vineyard versus a 20 hectare
process crop or 20 hectare pastoral irrigated block,
we are down to 24% of that annual water demand.
So we use our water extremely efficiently.
We are also one of, if not the only industry
that requires our members to meter and record
and report back on water usage.
In terms of efficiency
through our sustainable Wine growers NZ program swims,
New Zealand Wine Growers is specifically concerned about
the potential impact of market-based allocation systems.
We, we feel that this type of allocation could shift access
to water to those with the greatest financial capacity,
rather than users that are the most efficient.
We think that this risk, it has potential
for adverse environmental impacts,
while also penalizing those who are operating at close
to environmental optimum.
We have a strong preference
for allocation systems giving preference to those
that can demonstrate through robust data
that they have a sustainable land use
and that they're efficient users of, of,
of natural resources, particularly water.
New Zealand wine growers also strongly opposes the provision
for natural resource levies, uh,
as these are essentially an additional financial burden on
top of existing rates, consenting costs
and appropriate monitoring requirements.
These levies are not a very good means for,
for controlling demand, achieving the efficient use
of resources or reducing environmental effects.
We believe they should be scrapped.
Further, New Zealand wine growers opposes the introduction
of the requirement to register permanent activities under
the planning bill and natural environment Bill.
We consider that this requirement is, you know, considering
what BAU is on, on any farm
and any vineyard to try to register.
Each time you do that with, with a local council is,
is overly uh, burdensome, costly, and onerous.
Now, these are the day-to-day operations
that keep a farm going.
They're not practical.
They add cost to the system and,
and seem to de detract from the
government's goal of simplification.
The the best example we can, we can present to you, uh,
in terms of registering a permitted activity
for our members is, is vineyard spraying.
So we, we spray on a, well,
the chemical company's a nine day basis.
That's what they want us to do.
We are, we are trying to push it out as far as possible,
but it's fair to say it's a 10
or 11 day rotation of, of spraying.
Now, if we have to register with council
every permitted activity, every spray cycle,
when we could be planning
to spray tomorrow morning at four 30 in the morning,
and then we get up and the wind's blowing
and we can't spray, and a council's got 10 days to approve
or to acknowledge that we meet the permitted activities,
that's 10 working days, which in the real world's 14 days,
our industry can be crippled
and we can't, we can't undertake our spray schedule simply
because we can't meet the requirements
of a permitted activity registration.
To me, it, it seems like the requirement to
register permitted activity and
to get approval is essentially just another
name for a controlled activity.
It's essentially the same other than having
to apply for a consent.
But if we have to demonstrate compliance, if we have
to potentially get affected parties
and that affected party approval only lasts for three years
and can be withdrawn at any time, it it,
it's just a nightmare for our industry and our members.
It
Finally, we, we strongly consider that it's important
that national representative bodies have the opportunity
to make submissions and participate at the,
at the local level planning stage if required,
when these plans are in
the national interest of the industry.
And the, the best example here is the ongoing
tank plan change in Hawke's Bay.
Um, New Zealand Wine Growers has been involved in, in
that process to date
and supporting our regional organization up there,
Hawke's Bay Wine Growers
because of not just the, the, the impact it has there,
but the, how that impact broadens out across the
whole New Zealand system.
So it's critical that we are involved
when those plan changes can have national impacts.
So overall, and in conclusion, we certainly acknowledge
that the RMA is no longer fit for purpose
and strongly support the government's intent
in this reform process.
We consider that paying by paying specific attention to the,
the points we've raised will help to ensure a robust
and enduring resource management system
that increases certainty for business owners,
for our members, helps protect the natural environment
and simplifies the current complexity that it'll be fair
to say everyone is, is drowning in.
This will make it easy to get things done
that are consistent with the goals
that are set out in in clear planning processes.
Thank you very much.
Thank you for that submission.
Look, we'll go to Grant McCullum for the first question.
Yeah. Um, I was intrigued.
So just to highlight your, your example
around the water was, um,
so you're saying when we talk about rural
national standards rules, it's not only at a regional level,
it's within regions
because you use two example of two different, um,
two different rivers in the same region having
different challenges.
So that, that you want that much less flexibility
for the effort that sort of we, we,
Yeah. We, we need to be able
to look at it at a national standard
that says water clarity
or quality is going to be x subject to,
because we can, we can set those water quality
and clarity, uh, levels on a river
and a catchment by catchment basis.
I think it's the only way we can successfully go forward.
So catch There's, there's not one,
one rule that fits all. Yeah. Thank
You. And I might just jump in
and ask this that we on that,
'cause I had a similar kind of question
because you did give that example around water clarity
and a lot of your submission does focus on water.
Is that where you are the most concerned in terms
of the environmental limits
and obviously having, being able
to have regional input as well?
Yes. Um, certainly water is is absolutely critical, um,
for, um, the success of our industry largely along the,
the East Coast mm-hmm.
Of both islands. Um, you know, water is,
is it's highly, um, competitive.
New Zealand is getting warmer
and drier, um, with less snow melt.
Um, and, and those east coast catchments are likely to,
on long term average to have reduced access, um, to,
to clean fresh water.
So getting that allocation system right, um,
and basing that around, uh, incentivizing sustainability,
uh, we feel is is a great way, you know, to,
to not only ensure, you know, export return,
but also, you know, to protect, um, invite the environment
and and, and its quality.
Yeah, definitely. I just had one other set
because you talked about water meters
and you've being one of the only indu industries
that use water meters.
Obviously there's a lot of water efficiency, um,
in the wine growing sector.
Yes. Through, through sustainable wine growing
New Zealand, which is our industry led independently verify,
um, the sustainability certification scheme, um,
we set rules each year, which, which members must meet
and for water reporting on water.
Um, and,
and highlighting, you know, what you are doing
to improve the efficiency
of your operation is absolutely
fundamental to sustainable wine.
Growing New Zealand, we issue, um,
benchmarking reports each year, um, to individual vineyards
and wineries to highlight how they're tracking relative
to other sites, um, within their region.
Um, and and really trying to incentivize, um, that
that continuous improvement journey, um, particularly
around water as it's gonna be a, a scarce resource.
It's, it's, it's crucial to our success. Mm
Mm And Ryan had a supplementary thanks.
Just to supple on the water piece,
I think it was a local water done well, bill,
which is slightly adjacent to this,
but you guys, if I recall,
are really concerned about the chlorination, you know,
the sanitization requirements.
So that, did that get carved out in terms
of meeting in that, or?
I think it did so, so that the, the issue is in the, in,
in the winery side of the viticulture industry
and the chlorination of the water
and the inability to,
to produce the product that we wanna produce.
And I believe it was removed
From the cloudy bay, from
The cloudy bay, from our, from our industrial estate zone.
In your hands. Okay.
We might just move, we've got a couple
of questions online here.
Um, LA
Koto, can you hear me right?
Yes. Great, thank you.
Um, thanks so much for your submission today.
I just wanted to ask particularly about your call
for the treatment of greenhouse gas emissions.
And I'm wondering, um, what your rationale is like, is
that just so critical to New Zealand Wine Grows brand?
Is it, do you just see it as the right thing
to do? Do you wanna expand on that?
Sure. Our industry has a, has a goal
of being net zero by 2050.
Um, we believe in, in a range of our key markets
that expectation is fundamental to
to preferential market access
and ultimately, um, consumers getting, um, being able
to access our, our premium product.
So, um, that is an industry wide goal, um,
through sustainable wine growing New Zealand,
we also require, um, reporting on scope one
and two emissions and, and a range of scope three emissions.
And, and then our roadmap to 2 20 50 have highlighted,
you know, that the objectives we've got, um, to really, uh,
reduce our, our current footprint, um, down
to zero over the next 25 years.
Um, it's fundamental, um, you know, when people want a a,
a premium wine product, they wanna enjoy that,
they wanna ensure that it is sustainable and,
and greenhouse gas emissions are, are perhaps the most, um,
talked about area of sustainability.
Um, and, and that's why it's so important that, that we um,
can, can demonstrate that we are moving towards that net,
net zero target and accelerating.
Thank you. We've just
Gotta supplementary on that, that there,
Then I'll come back to you now.
So fundamentally, does it do, does it have to be, um,
the climate goals have to be, climate change should be part
of the goals for you to want do that anyway?
Are you not doing that as a, for commercial reasons anyway?
Well, I think there's a balance there.
We have to protect the places that,
that make our, our famous wine.
Um, we've seen through, um, you know, the, the,
the really significant impacts of,
of climate change has brought
with more extreme weather events,
you know, flooding in the Marlboro region.
Cyclone Gabriel had a,
had a catastrophic impact in Hawke's Bay.
Um, and then ultimately, you know, the work we've done
around planning out to, to the end of the century where, um,
the challenge of growing our, our, um, you know,
unique wines in, in the regions that they are, um,
climate change has, is, is, is critical.
Thank you. And Lan,
did you just have something else to add there?
Yes, yes. Thanks Chair. Just one last question.
Um, so I'm interested if you know, particularly,
you were talking about, um, this challenge
of water allocation
and, you know, I I guess the equity amongst users
and I wanted to, um, test your thoughts, particularly on
this new RM system where basically fast track projects
that are granted outside the system
could essentially come up over the top
and crunch the rights of existing users.
And I'm thinking particularly, you know, I'm aware of the
Bendigo proposed, um, gold mine with the potential
to essentially come in
and crunch existing water users in the catchment.
Do you have any, um, comments on that?
Look, um, we, we've certainly, um, engaged with our, um,
members down in central Otago on that particular project
and, and, and supported them, um, uh, in, in their, um,
their views against that, that particular project.
I think it's important that, um, uh, we don't,
uh, necessarily get in the way of business.
We when, um, you know, tho those, those businesses are, uh,
are given the opportunities that, that they put in front
of them, um, for us for water.
Um, you know, that,
that is why we are certainly supporting the most efficient
use, um, of water being prioritized, um, you know,
as it has the, the least likely, um, impact on,
on environmental health.
So, um, that is one of the key reasons why we've put
that forward as a, as a key, um, driver of prioritization.
And also one of the reasons why we're opposed to the,
the market based allocation.
The last thing our industry needs is, is someone
to become a water farmer and someone lock up the resource
and, and sell it.
We, we, we need equitable access and, and reliable access.
We talked about the need for a 35 year term,
that's obviously a maximum.
We, we are also of a view that there needs
to be a minimum in Marlborough.
We've got, uh, interest groups
and iwi arguing for five year terms on a water permit.
And if we don't accept it on behalf of our clients,
we end up in a 70 to $80,000 council hearing
and potentially the environment court.
Mm-hmm. Um, there's no, there's no certainty going forward.
No, no desire to invest going forward.
If you've gotta spend two, three, 4 million
and you get a five year term,
it's just, it just doesn't work.
Um, look, we are gonna have to wrap up,
but Cameron Luxon had his hand up, so we'll just go
to one last question, Cameron.
Uh, thank you. Uh, really quick then, in your, uh,
submission, there's a thing about competing goals,
having a non-hierarchical list of competing goals.
Have you given any thought to, um, goals that you would see,
uh, higher or lower in a proposed hierarchy
or how that could even be managed?
Would it be through the legislation
or through grouping specific goals together?
Just your thoughts on that,
Steve, would you like to? Yeah,
uh, we haven't specifically turned the mind to which,
which goal has higher priority
or which one in the hierarchy should be there.
Our concern is that when you've got the planning bill
and the NEB and they've got conflicting goals,
how do you balance them?
And, and is life supporting capacity
or sustainability the most important of these goals?
Either way, there needs to be some direction,
otherwise the only people
who are gonna win outta here are the lawyers.
'cause we're just going to end up back
through the courts again to determine
the hierarchy of those goals.
Thank you. Look, thank you very much.
We have met time this morning on your submission, um,
some really interesting insights and considerations
and, uh, you know, coming from Hawke's Bay, one of the, uh,
wine capitals of New Zealand, uh, I'm always keen
to advocate, uh, you know,
and promote our wonderful New Zealand wines.
So thank you for your time today. Thank
You. Thank you.
And so our next submitter is Becca Limited,
who are here in person.
Yes. Welcome to the select committee this morning.
Thank you. You have, uh, 20 minutes with us, uh,
of course taking your submission as read,
and we will hand it over to you
for your opening introductions.
Good morning. Um, thank you very much.
Andrea Ricard, um, managing director
for New Zealand at Becca, also a planner.
Um, and with me is Bryce Julian, who is, um, our, uh,
senior principal planner, um, fellow
of NZ Planning Institute, who are appearing
after us as it happens, trustee of the Commonwealth, um,
association of Planners,
and also the former chair of the NZPI.
Um, we'll highlight some of the points, um, aiming
for about seven minutes or so,
and then leave the rest for questions.
Um, so a bit about Becca and why we are interested in here.
Um, one of Asia Pacific's largest independent advisory
design and engineering consultancies
and a delivery partner
for government and the private sector.
We've worked across the country for 106 years now
and supporting central
and local government iwi Maori communities on planning
infrastructure and environmental issues.
Our teams work at every scale from national policy
and system design through to regional spatial planning
and local implementation.
So we see firsthand how planning frameworks operate
and practice and what helps 'em succeed.
Uh, we've got four over 4,000 employees
and over 75 disciplines.
So our business is diverse
and as practitioners, we work across many,
many market sectors.
So therefore, our submission is necessarily at a high level.
Uh, we've contributed to a number
of the industry body submissions.
And note, um, those, the NZPI folks appearing
after us, um, we're a firm that is proudly employee owned.
We've got 40% of our people owning the she in Becca
and our model, and therefore our culture
and way of working is intergenerational.
So we see this planning legislation change
as a significant milestone for the country to reset
and refresh how we enable the future.
Uh, a couple of comments from me before I hand to Bryce.
Um, uh, when major system changes occur,
the transition pathway is as important as the final design.
There are lessons from the introduction of the RMA in 1991
and from more recent fast track processes.
In both cases, our observation is
that the sector needs clearer sequencing,
realistic timeframes longer than those proposed currently
and stronger support and direction for implementation.
A well-designed transition avoids duplication,
reduces uncertainty, and helps the industry.
Councils and communities focus on
outcomes rather than process.
It helps keep things moving.
A key opportunity is ensuring
that existing well-developed frameworks such
as special zone overlays, freshwater plans,
and long-term infrastructure strategies can be carried
forward or grandparent, uh, with a sunset
where that's appropriate.
This avoids losing momentum
and allows the new system to build on
and work, uh, the work that's already been done
that reflects local priorities and community engagement.
So sequencing the transition is, uh, is,
is critically important so that consensus based elements
that move first will help maintain
continuity and confidence.
I know the importance also of the use
of digital tools at a national level.
The sooner the better. A failing
of the RMA era is a collection of so much information
and monitoring, yet national baseline information about
quality of environment is limited or inconsistent.
So over to Bryce.
Uh, thanks Andrea. Uh, I think that the first thing I want
to start with is the need for that reconciliation
between the purpose goals and how we actually manage it.
Because the framework's really important.
We work across a number of industries
and different, uh, areas of work.
So it's not like we're in one particular area,
but making sure that that framework is really well, uh,
balanced and really clear makes it so much easier for us
to assist, uh, clients and, um,
and businesses going forward.
I think in particular, there needs to be clarity about
how those goals in particular interact
and how the decision makers should reconcile them when they,
when they, particularly, when they point
in different directions.
Uh, consistency across both acts is essential,
so the planners and councils and infrastructure providers
and others can make those decisions confidently
and without the need to, uh,
or avoids the need for long-term, uh, discussion and debate.
Uh, the infrastructure example is probably a really good,
uh, good one to, uh, land on, uh,
where we say when goals aren't reconciled,
infrastructure providers face uncertainty with the pathways
to get to approvals.
They, uh, have also have environmental requirements.
And then the timing and sequencing becomes a, a large issue.
So better long-term planning
and more efficient delivery is really what
we want this framework to try and deliver it.
Um, to achieve clarity and framework for reconciliation.
I think between the goals of the two proposed acts,
we'd encourage changes to the purpose
and goals to better align
and relate to the outcomes that are envisaged, uh,
without a clear way to reconcile those early in the
legislation that reconciliate reconciliation is
deferred and shows up later.
And as I said, project delays, redesign, cost escalation,
litigation, the very things we want the system to try
and, uh, shrink.
So the purpose of the bills would benefit from a link
that better and more clearly reflects the common elements
between the, the two acts or proposed acts,
and one that recognizes the intrinsic link perhaps
between our environment and our wellbeing.
Um, uh, economic, social, cultural, the purpose
and goals at present, uh, focus on use, but not the outcome.
And we agree with the NZ PI's, uh, submission
and infrastructure New Zealand submission,
which raises deficiency
and would point out particularly, uh,
the New Zealand Planning Institute's, uh, uh,
submission 3.4 to 3.6,
which talks about what's missing from the goals since the
substantive process that's critical
to get the legislative structure right to provide that, uh,
strength to the framework
and reduce those risks of, uh, costs and litigation later.
Again, uh, the NCPI submission is, uh,
very strongly and well thought out,
and I think in its submission, 3 6 2, uh, relates
to the clarification about the substantial purpose
of the bills and the linkage to a shared
or parallel goal Aligning to that overall principle of, uh,
development within limits.
This would better link the provisions of the two bills, um,
because at the moment they're kind of, uh, they do sort
of sit up apart and it's really intrinsic, it's a framework
and we know the separate legislation,
but they, uh, need to work together.
I also note in the natural environment bill, the purposes
for the use protection
and enhancement of the natural environment.
But there's no goal
that directly addresses either protection or enhancement.
And we'd recommend that, uh, there's goals included
or, uh, amended to try and include those.
And again, I think the NZPI submission really covers this,
that, uh, very thoroughly,
but the goals are fundamental to the part of the framework
to be established between the bills.
So, um, one of the things
that I would also point out is the goals are, uh,
worded with the words that seek to achieve, um, things,
but in fact, that's quite the words seek
to achieve aren't really that clear.
They're not very strong. So again, it would support changes
to tie those principles, uh, into a much more
clearer directive, um, in terms of, uh, what they want
to achieve, what are the outcomes being sought.
And I'd also support, uh, the, uh, note
that NZPI makes in its submission about, uh, clause 45
of the planning bill in 69 of the national environment bill
to apply to all decision makers rather than just the
ministers, to try
and get that, uh, regard when considering goals
for, for the, the principles at hard.
And that would include, um, uh, the,
or those matters that are covered in those two clauses so
that you get that assistance for outcomes, uh,
set out in those goals
and to help with that reconciliation
for all decision makers.
I'll just move on quickly to limits.
Um, the, uh, many of, yeah, I'll go fast.
Uh, so the limits are important.
We really want to, uh, emphasize that need
that ideally these should also, uh, align with outcomes.
The trouble with limits is it tends to drive a lower,
you know, that's the, the minimum that you'll make.
Whereas if you want to actually achieve outcomes,
and I think we mentioned environmental outcomes can be
positive for, uh, the economy, for infrastructure,
for business, but it's a clear clarity
and certainty that the framework needs to give to give us
that confidence to make sure those, uh, uh, I guess
the outcomes are actually achieved.
Do you want to pick up on
Yeah, look, I'll, um, pick up on spatial planning.
I can see there's some questions. Um, there.
We, we welcome, um, spatial plans, um, as 30 year plans.
Getting them right is critical
and we see that as a significant opportunity to, um, explain
and implement the vision for a region if it's undertaken in
a thorough, robust, and collaborative way.
Um, particularly where there's clarity
of direction if you're wanting to push something in,
in quite a different direction to what has been, um,
experienced, um, in the past.
Mm-hmm. So clear sequencing, as I mentioned earlier,
is critically important.
And I'll just, um, close by emphasizing, um,
timeframes are really important
and the sequencing's important.
We know from, um, when the RMA was introduced,
how long the process took to develop plans, it is important
that those plans go through, um, a robust, um, process.
And, um, the, the challenge with those is
that they are such a significant opportunity if done well,
um, and they're a challenge.
If not, um, we did have a number
of other comments in our submission,
perhaps we'll leave it there for, for questions.
Yeah, no, good idea. We have got lots of questions,
so we will, uh, start with Rachel Brooking.
Hello. Thank. Thank you.
Um, I'm interested in
what you were just talking about environmental outcomes
there and in your point
that they can be good for everything.
Uh, and in your submission you talk about care, um,
the importance of, uh, targets as well as the limits
and monitoring of those.
And, uh, the, you reference a geographic area.
Um, I I, I'd like you to expand a little bit on that
and where you see, um, targets in this legislation, um,
if there's space for them
and, um, what you mean by a geographic region.
Geographic area. Thank you.
I think, um, certainly with targets, that's probably the,
the outcomes that we're trying to seek.
And I think it's a way
of expression rather than setting limits, which are,
I suppose, thresholds, which you can work to.
And what I think the opportunity is
that you have a framework
that actually seeks to achieve outcomes.
So for instance, um, if you want to achieve, uh,
good in, I don't know, environmental outcomes,
but you still want to enable, uh, you might want
to still seek limits, you want plans
and, uh, industry
or infrastructure, for instance, providers to achieve those,
but also give the outcome that you want.
Sorry, I'm sort of looking this way.
Yeah, just look in front of you.
That's where I camera see you if you look at the camera.
Um, but, but do you think the legislation provides
for those outcomes and targets
and the framework around that?
And then also if you can comment on the geographic area
and the importance of geography when it comes to planning,
I think the geographic area would, would,
was probably generic in the sense
that any geographic area we would look to, uh, outcome.
So spatial planning, for instance, is a really critical tool
to use that sort of identification
at your regional level
or various district level to, to determine what are the
outcomes that you'd want to see.
Not just necessarily setting limits.
'cause the limits are there and they should apply, um,
probably across the, the motu.
Um, but if you can achieve outcomes,
that's just as good, if you know what I mean.
You're actually achieving something that you want to, uh,
get as a result of the investment or development or
Use. And, and, and does
this legislation
provide for those outcomes?
No, I don't think it does at the moment.
I think that's the bit that we would add.
Um, and I think if that may be with the goals,
they could be expressed differently.
So rather than just driving Lord's limits,
it might be outcomes that you want to achieve.
Look, thank, thank you for that.
Now we'll move to Ryan Hamilton for a question.
Uh, thanks for your submission.
I noticed in particular emphasis on schedule three, um, uh,
mandatory matters, I think it is.
And you recommend the insertion of economic development.
And I'm just wondering, do you think that's a bit of a,
a miss given that we've been talking about RMA productivity,
economic development, do you think it's quite, um,
imperative that that's clarified through that schedule?
Um, I, I think it's, it's really important
that environmental outcomes, um,
and sitting within an economic frame, um, are
what we're getting at there.
Um, there is an economic benefit, um, to my mind
of maintaining an enhancing environment in the environment.
And, um, that, that is, um, what we are,
what we are getting at there.
I think that's the clause that you're talking to,
Sorry, enhancing the environment.
It talks about, um, we strongly recommend the addition
of an extra mandatory matter
to be addressed in spatial plans, uh,
to address potential economic development opportunities,
areas where specific economic activities,
where industry should be enabled, et cetera. That's the,
Yeah, that's, uh, I think what we were getting there is
that things like, uh, ports for instance, we don't,
we think those, uh, areas will need to have, uh,
I guess recognition that there's a sort of,
uh, existing investment.
There's some, some provisions now that have been worked
through over many years to get right.
And one of the things we would like to see is the retention
of some of those systems
or frameworks that have been developed
because they work well,
they've got buy-in from the stakeholders.
So it's that kind of discussion where we think that that,
that the system needs to allow for perhaps carry over
of some of those, I don't think it's excluded by this,
but it's just really trying to make sure that
that's not lost.
If you like, that the investment in that, uh, in those sort
of, uh, big investments and that are working now
and have been resolved within the regions
or the areas of, uh,
specifically we're talking about are quite, quite,
We just move back on line
to Cameron Luxton who's got a question.
Oh, you're on mute, Cameron. Just turn your voice on.
I put my hand down instead of unmuting. Apologies.
Um, the, yeah, you've got support of section, um, 2 8 3,
which is the levying function in the planning bill.
Um, and just I, so I followed it back through
and it goes to, uh, references 180,
which is the registration,
and then 38, which is actually a permit activity.
And it got me wondering, is there a level of activity
that's sort of not even permitted?
Is there a lower level or will every, uh, activity,
the lowest level will be permitted,
therefore it could attract a, a levying function
Activities below permitted.
Yeah. So you basically, you've and Becca
and your submission, you've supported the levying function
of permitted activities in the planning bill.
Right. I'm just wondering, is there anything
that's not even reaching that level of, of permitted,
so is every activity
therefore permitted in your re uh, every activity
therefore permitted,
therefore attracting a levying function?
Is there an activity that's not even permitted,
which would be exempt from their levying function in 2 8 3?
I'm not sure I understand the question.
Okay. If I just, I'll try, I'll try
and reframe it then I'll, I'll leave it.
But it's just like, is if I do something, it's permitted.
Yes. Yeah. If there's something lower than permitted as in,
doesn't even register in this, uh, framework.
And the reason I ask is if there is a levying function,
which Becca is supporting on permitted activities,
is there a, is there anything that could,
we could do in the planning environment
and the environ, like anything we could do in New Zealand
that wouldn't attract a levying function?
Yeah, perhaps we'll enable you
to have a think about that one.
Um, given we're in time constraints, um,
LAN farm has a question.
We'll move on.
Yeah. Thank you. Um, my question was just a follow up to
your answers about, um, existing systems
and regulations that are in place,
and I think it's in your submission, you mentioned, uh,
the work that's gone on with sort of aquaculture
and geothermal systems
and also the model of, uh, water quality in UA
and topo.
Are those the kinds of examples
that you are talking about when you are, when you refer
to kind of not in the transition,
not throwing out the work that's already done?
Yes. Yes. Yep.
The, the reason for putting those examples is was to try
and illustrate that there are some well held examples
that have been, um, well discussed
and in those cases, um, we thought those were examples
that showed opportunities to, um, as you say, um, transition
through and provide that confidence.
Look, thank you very much for your time this morning
and for your submission.
Um, we have got the New Zealand Planning Institute coming up
next, so you've referenced quite a lot.
So, uh, yeah, we appreciate that and those insights.
Thank you. Thank you. Bye everyone.
So, uh, now we do have the New Zealand Planning Institute,
which has, uh, been referred to quite a few times
and that submission, um, look, we thank you
for your submission 'cause it's a really, um, you know,
weighty submission, um, with lots
of really good considerations and insights in there.
So, um, do take that as read.
But look, you have 20 minutes with us to, um, talk us
through this, um, submission.
So we'll hand it over to you
and then open it up for questions.
Thank you. Um, Koto, thank you.
The opportunity to speak today.
I'm Andrea Harris, chair of, um, TE Cota,
the New Zealand Planning Institute,
and joining me is David Curtis, CEO,
and Emily Grace, chief Policy Officer.
We've provided the committee with some visuals.
I don't intend to talk to them directly,
but we'll be happy to answer questions
that you may have after I cover off.
Key key points.
NZPI wants to see an enduring, balanced,
and workable resource management system.
While we see much to support in the two new bills,
we also see OVERCORRECTIONS and implementation issues.
NZPI supports regional spatial planning,
which allows more purposeful planning
to achieve growth and development.
Spatial planning will play an essential role in integrating
environmental constraints, infrastructure and growth.
We also support nationally standardized plan contents
and methodologies, which have the potential
to take significant tune out of the system
and create consistency.
The more significant recommendations in our submission
relate to overcorrections,
where we consider the pendulum has swung too
far in the opposite direction.
In particular, the removal
of the substantive purpose statement
and operative treaty laws narrowing the scope of the system,
weak environmental protection
and lack of environmental enhancement,
reduced participation, reduced parti participation rights,
and the regulatory relief regime.
I'll briefly summarize our
recommendations on these five issues.
A clear purpose statement for managing land use
and natural resources is essential so
that everyone understands the reason for regulation
and the direction of travel.
More than this, a substantive purpose statement will provide
guidance for the minister and other decision makers
when resolving conflicts between competing interests.
We've recommended amending the purpose statements
and giving priority to the development within limits goal
and both bills to provide this clarity.
You've already heard many speakers talk about the removal
of the treaty principles clause
and other provisions for iwi and hapu.
Removal of an operative treaty principles clause
rolls back over 20 years.
Planning practice and case law on treaty principles.
Starting again with a new approach will cause uncertainty
for implementation and brings litigation risk.
We support retaining existing RMA provisions such as manhan
and more substantial Maori rights and interest goal
and an operative treaty clause.
A narrow scope of land use planning needs
to be clearly articulated in clause 14 of the planning bill.
Otherwise, there will be implementation issues
and inconsistency across councils.
There also needs to be a link between the effects
that can be managed and the goals to be achieved.
Otherwise, the system will fail to achieve the goals.
Provisions in clause 14 are not defined,
and the reference to visual amenity is problematic.
We see problems for planning well functioning urban areas
when we cannot consider the layout of buildings on site.
Our visual aids provide examples of this issue.
The goals in the natural environment bill have lost
protection and enhancement and requirements.
These requirements are compatible
with development within limits
framing and should be included.
We support the use of limits,
but we consider these should be a stronger tool.
Limits should protect bottom lines
and legislation should not allow breaches
of human health limits
or the setting of less stringent limits.
Also, communities should be able
to set more stringent limits that are, that improve
or enhance, um, where that can be achieved.
And CPI considers it's unrealistic for the bills
to focus the majority
of public participation in the system at the policy
development stage and restrict participation at
the resource consent stage.
This is because of the fundamental shift in
who writes the rules that apply to private property.
This will now be done by central government.
The general public is unlikely
to get involved in the setting
of rules by central government.
We have recommended a two step process for the development
of the first set of national standards to try
and address this challenging consultation environment.
We've also recommended the removal of restrictions on
who can submit on re on consent
and permit applications as proposed
restrictions and not practical.
The final over overcorrection we note is the regulatory
relief regime.
We understand the committee has heard a lot from
submitters on this issue already.
NZPI submission puts forward an alternative
that we think is practical and workable
and addresses the issue of overregulation overregulation
by councils in a proportionate way.
We've created a diagram to illustrate our alternative.
There's three other points I just
want to make before we close.
The quality of decision making is important for official,
efficient and credible system,
but the bills do not address this issue
where you seek the reintroduction
of accredited decision makers back into the bills.
A digital first planning system is critical
to delivering consistency, efficiency,
transparency, and public trust.
This must be built into the system from the beginning,
and we've recommended ways
to achieve this in the legislation.
Transition from the RMA
to the new system is a high risk point for implementation.
The timeframes for transition are not practical
and we'll set the system up to fail.
We've recommended a more reasonable alternative
timeframe as part of this.
We've also recommended a more practical approach
to transitional consenting.
It is possible to achieve the change in the system
relatively quickly through consenting,
while providing more time for the development
of the new planning instruments.
It is in everyone's interest
to set this system up properly from the start.
Thank you. And we're happy to answer questions.
Brilliant. Um, look, we might just take off the, um, the,
um, PowerPoint dear so we can see questions
because I know that, um, Rachel Brooking has a lot
of questions for you on this submission.
Rachel, I'll hand it over to you first. I
Don't even have my hand up yet,
But I knew because you've talked about the submission.
No, thank you.
Hey, why don't, why don't we start
with the purpose statements
and what you were saying about, um,
them being more substantive
and how the two acts work together.
Um, if you could, uh, tell us how that
that can be fixed, that'd be useful.
And then, um, before you do,
and I I'm on the zoom, I'm also interested in the, um,
and very different question, um,
and the visual immunity,
particularly in an urban environment and what effects can
and can't, can't be considered.
And uh, you just had the last slide up there I think was
demonstrating about how you can do intensity well, um,
and not cause shading problems.
So I'm interested if you could cover that as well.
Thank you.
Uh, so the first question about the purpose
statement, uh, and the goals.
We have thought an awful lot about how
the purpose statements and the goals work together
and how they set up the framework for the ACT overall.
And what has happened when you remove, uh,
a purpose statement is that we just have a lot
of uncertainty and no clear direction about
what we are planning for and why.
So there's no purpose to the legislation
and no purpose to regulation when you don't have a purpose.
Uh, so that means that when you come
to make national direction, which is the responsibility
of the minister, there's nothing to guide
how that should be set.
And there's nothing that guides how conflicts are resolved
between the two sets of goals
or even within the goals themselves.
So there's nothing. So you can get inconsistency.
Um, one set of national direction could be decided based on
one set of things, you know, there's nothing.
And then another set gets dec decided, uh,
based on a different basis.
So without a substantive purpose statement, you just kind
of, it, it ends up being a little bit random.
So a substantive purpose statement helps
bring that all together.
Uh, and, and it,
and it helps, yeah, to resolve conflicts, I guess, um,
when it comes down to it,
because if those aren't resolved right at the top
of the system, they just will repeat themselves
and kind of get bigger as you move down through the system.
Um, on visual immunity, uh, our,
our main point about the scope of the system is that,
uh, you still need to be able to achieve the goals.
So if you narrow the system too much by excluding effects,
you might find that you actually can't achieve your goals
because you can't manage the effects that you need
to achieve those goals.
And so in particular, we've highlighted, uh, the layout
of a site, um, landscape effects
and we question the visual amenity.
Um, visual amenity isn't the most important thing,
but it's linked to a lot of things.
And it's not a simple exercise to separate out, uh, effects
to com compartmentalize them all the time.
So things, uh,
things can control more than one effect.
So the way something looks
isn't necessarily something we need to control,
but the amount of, uh, sunlight or shading
or visual dominance or, um, those kind of, um, bulk
and location things are really important for how we, um, use
and enjoy, um, our, our urban environments.
Thank you very much. Look,
we have you got another question there, Rachel?
Or am I, I'll move to Lan who has her hand up as well.
Thank you. Well, first I've just got a supplementary on
that, um, urban environment.
So what is your perception of
where the bill is at when it comes to say,
urban tree protection?
Uh, urban tree protection's, one of those
not entirely clear where the bill's at.
I think, uh, the,
the list of things to be excluded, um, some
of those are not entirely clear how they're defined
or what they encompass.
And so it,
and also the bill, the structure of the bills leaves a lot
of detail to national direction.
So it may be that national direction, um,
that provides direction on achieving the goal
of well-functioning urban environments might provide some
clarity, but if you don't have the basis right in the act
itself, and it turns out that, um,
and that is excluded, uh, then it just,
that'll cause problems later.
So I think the urban trees, um, situation is one
that could do with a little bit of clarity.
Okay. Thank you. And then I just wanted
to pick up on your, um, comments
and really the thrust of your submission when it comes to
no net loss for biodiversity,
and you've been very clear that you think
that could be strengthened to something like net gain.
Um, do you think, you know,
o other people have brought up this issue
and it, it's been kind
of talked about whether there could be, for example,
a general maintain
or improve almost like baseline across, uh,
potentially some of the environmental, um,
factors like biodiversity.
Do you have any comments on that?
Um, yes. I think NZ P'S preferences for, for there
to be outcomes and the goals not just, um, processes to go
through maintenance isn't an outcome.
It's something that you do
because you want to achieve something else.
So, so net gain,
and to be fair, no net loss, they are actually outcomes.
That's the end state that we want.
So our preference is definitely for it to be, um, net gain
because that's an outcome
and we can use all the different tools available in the
planning system to try and achieve that.
I think, oh, we've got a supplementary on that question.
Um, and so when you talk about like,
like need gain biodiversity, for example, if that was
to mean for a, a landowner
that it would have substantial impact on their business,
would you support regulatory relief in that process?
Um, we have, we have
proposed an alternative regulatory relief process
and it, it all depends.
So if there's a goal in the legislation, uh, to achieve
net gain or no net loss, then
a national direction is developed
that sets out the methodology for how to do that.
That would include things like what the criteria are
and what considerations should be given to some things.
If that's done, uh, in a holistic and
and fear kind of way, then considerations
of impacts on landowners would be part of that.
And the methodology applied would be, um, a reasonable one.
And so then you get down to the point at which it's applied.
Um, and again, the considerations of the kind
of place-based impacts if that are considered, uh,
for regulatory relief.
What we've suggested is that if a outcome,
if a rule in a plan is
because of following a prescribed methodology
that theoretically has been set in that reasonable
and logical way, then relief shouldn't apply
because there's been a decision made right at the top
that this is an outcome that we need for the country.
Um, so our proposal for regulatory relief is
that it's those exception situations that it would apply to.
So, so Yeah, I had a similar question.
Yeah, you go, um, just
because yeah, I was interested in your views on regulatory
relief and obviously you've
provided an alternative solution within your submission.
Um, but how do you determine, um, when you are
identifying, because I think, you know, what, what is up
for regulatory relief
and what's not up for regulatory relief?
Because, um, that's what I'm,
I suppose a bit confused about in
terms of your recommendation.
Sorry, what, how do you, how did you,
So it said, you said instead the system would focus on
identifying, correcting genuinely unreasonable
local restrictions.
Yeah. So it's like genuinely unreasonable.
Like how would you define that?
Like what's in your view,
like this alternative solution here?
Yeah. Um, I'd be interested to hear from you in terms
of your solution. Yeah,
So I guess the first point is that if you,
if a rule results from a nationally set methodology, then
by default it's not unreasonable
because there's been a, a minister
of the Crowns decided that this should happen.
Mm. And a methodology's being developed
and the rule that results is, is
by default, not unreasonable.
And so then the provisions in the bill,
so they're already in the bill, um, is it section 1 0 5,
forget the section references,
but there's already provisions in the bill that require
consideration of, um,
whether a rule impacts the reasonable use of land or not.
So that's the consideration.
You are looking, uh, at the restriction,
the role places on the reasonable use of that land.
And, and so that's a you, that requires a particular type
of an assessment, but it's,
those provisions are already in the bill
and they already exist in the RMA, uh, as well.
So it's building on, uh, something that's already in place.
So, and, and here you're saying that to not apply it
to provisions, protecting sites of significance
to Maori managing natural hazard risk
or enabling significant infrastructure? That's
Right. Yep. So another
thing, by default,
those provisions wouldn't be unreasonable, I guess.
Okay.
Something to, so, but is there a danger in this area?
Because we had a recent example recently in, in the north
where they put E CNAs over a whole pile of, came out
with the rules about E CNAs and the whole pile of north and,
and it, it united the farm community iwi the whole lot
because suddenly they have restrictions
being lined up on their land.
And it's all very well for people who aren't affected
to say it's a goal they would like.
Mm-hmm. But it doesn't affect them directly, you know, so
that's why I just think that, you know, we don't lose sight
that actually the stuff has real impact
on people's businesses. I just
Think, think you've missed it.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I think the other thing, just
to bear in mind and in our, um, one of our slides
that we've, um, provided you, if,
if the national government actually, um, identifies, um,
a methodology for identifying SNAs, then why should, um,
regulatory relief be applied to that?
Because the methodology's already
been set at the national level.
Okay. It's where a council would take that further.
That's where regulatory relief should be applied. Does that
Help? Yeah. Yeah. No, that's,
that's good. Thank you.
Look, we've got a couple of questions online here.
We'll go to HOA Lydon.
Um, I'm just wanting to explore with you, um,
some submitters have raised worries about ministerial
powers, uh, within the legislation
and the way that it could, uh, create a system whereby,
depending on the government of the day,
we will not have stability in implementing standards.
And, um, what are your thoughts, um, around that
and what, what are some protections that we need to lock in?
So we have made a few recommendations to help,
uh, address that issue.
So when the minister is setting national direction,
we've made recommended recommendations that
the technical advisory group, uh,
which is currently optional, is actually compulsory.
So that there is a level of independent advice, uh,
that goes into that process.
And our, um, recommendation
for a substantive purpose statement, uh, will also help with
that because that provides a kind of backstop of, um, how,
how conflicts might be resolved.
I think it is fair to say that that is one of the concerns
around, um, how the structure of the bills are,
because there, you know, when there is change in government
and the ability to move
and change the national direction,
that will have a very big knock on effect in terms
of the stability of the system.
So the more we can actually have right up front some
stability and some clear direction, the better so
that we don't end up in that flip flop type
of situation in the future.
Thank you. Look, Cameron Luxton has a question online.
Thank you, chair. I just was trying to understand, just,
uh, is it the position of the planning institute that, um,
if a, a, uh, policy direction
that puts an impetus on a council
to put a planning restriction, uh,
there should be sufficient off ramps for the council
to not have to provide regulatory relief for that
because it's being put in by an outside source,
in this case, central government.
Um, you're, I think I've got that kind of right.
And then do you think there would be a case to be made
that central government should provide regulatory relief
or that, um, by the fact the minister has done it,
it is exempt from that sort of program?
Uh, yeah, we did, we do cover that in the submission.
So when a council basically doesn't have a choice about
imposing a restriction
because they are following the national direction,
we have said that that seems inappropriate.
Then for the council, we have to compensate for that
because they're in a rock
and a hard place, um, in that situation.
And we have said if some, if the regime stayed,
then there is a logical argument that the Crown pays
for the restriction
because they're the ones that, um, wanted
to be there or have made that decision.
So, um, yeah, it's part of
The clarification. Yeah.
Yeah. Thank you.
And look, now we'll go back to Rachel Brooking.
Just a quick question on the digital first,
which I know you support.
I just wondering if you had any, um, takeaways
that you wanna leave in terms of experience with, um,
e plans and how, how, how to make this work in transition
and knowing that, of course, um, these things often seem
to go wrong and cost a lot of money.
I think our national system
and clear, um, requirements, like I've said
before, um, that a digital strategy is really important
because if everybody's collecting data in the same way,
then it's easy to write code to actually get
that information out of all the different databases and,
and get a national picture.
Um, I don't think New Zealand is too small
to actually have a good digital system.
Um, you know, south Australia has a really good digital
system and they're not much bigger than what we are, um,
in terms of when you think about number of councils and,
and what they're trying to achieve.
So it is possible to do it.
I think we just need to move on
and actually move planning on in
terms of how we actually do it.
But the, the key there, Rachel,
is making sure the system requires
that data capture in a consistent way from the outset.
That gives us time to develop the digital systems
that will utilize that data.
But if it is the old garbage in, it'll be garbage out.
So we need the bills to make sure those requirements
are clear from the outset.
Look, thank you very much, uh,
for your submission this morning.
Uh, really thorough submission,
lots of considerations there.
Um, so we do thank you for spending the time to, uh, give
that to us this morning and in, um, written form as well.
So thank you very much. Thank
You.
So we now call on our next submitter,
or who are here in person.
Welcome to the select committee this morning.
Great to have you with us.
And we've got, um, yeah, we'll come up
to the, to the table here.
We've got enough chairs there. Brilliant.
Uh, look, you've got 20 minutes with us.
Um, take your submission as read,
but we'll hand over to you for
introductions and to talk us through it.
So thank you.
Uh, my name's Callum Ani.
Um, I'm the chair of the board of TE
is the mandated iwi authority for ti.
We are an iwi originally from the wattle,
but based here sincerely,
18 hundreds across the wider Wellington region in, in
the north of the south island.
Currently, our run offices are established in
where we hire about 500 people,
and we also have operations in Nelson as well.
Um, we are closely related
and connected to, uh, Nati ROA in the Kati region,
and also I mentioned them
because they have also made submissions
and we, uh, want to make it clear
that we support the submissions that they've made.
Uh, with me as Ari Forkner, Ari is one
of our executive leaders, um, and Robert McClain
and, uh, Ko Stewart are here, um, to, uh, contribute
to this discussion as well.
So I'll start with a, a few thoughts
and then hand over to, to our people.
Uh, look, thank you for the opportunity to appear.
Um, the, the point that we bring is
that we oppose the bills in the way that, uh,
that they are at the moment.
We accept that the Resource Management Act is imperfect
and that reform is needed,
but reform, uh, needs to be principled, durable,
and consistent with, in our view, these bills do not
yet meet the standard.
Our concerns are threefold.
First, the, uh, bills place, treaty settlements
and established partnership arrangements at risk.
Our settlements been negotiated in the context of
our current resource management system.
They should not now be narrowed, reopened,
or weakened through reform.
Uh, second, the bill places, uh,
the bill place treaty settlements
and established partnership arrangements at risk.
The, uh, bill weakens the place
of ity in the environmental decision making.
They allow the crown too much scope
to define its own treaty responsibilities,
rather than requiring a genuine, genuine treaty based, uh,
framework to be shared with man.
And third, the bill centralizes power
and prioritization development in ways
that risk undermining protection for TAMA landscapes
and place-based relationships, uh,
that may have taken many years to build.
So UNA supports reform,
but only effort is built on a stronger founda foundation.
In particular, uh, we ask
that the legislation require decision makers to give effect
to tei, uh, protect treaty settlements fully
and meaningfully, and provide for genuine
and enduring partnership with iwi across the systems
for national direction, from national direction
through the local planning and implementation.
So, as stated before, as a part of the, uh,
art Confederation of Nati,
uh, we support the submissions that they have,
um, made to the state.
So that's a, a quick overview.
The points,
Um, many of the technical aspects
of our submission are not new to you.
Uh, they have been traversed by many submitters before us
and will be traversed by many submitters after us.
Um, like many submitters
before me, um, I have a long history
and association with the RMA, both as a planner,
as a practitioner in an iwi space, uh, both, um,
as a manager and as a a consultant, and also a commissioner.
Having sat on a number of hearings, uh, RMA hearings, um,
all over the MuTu, um, it saddens me
that we are here once again, asking the government to act
with honor, uh,
and to not undermine what we agreed to in good faith.
At a time where a vision of prosperity
and a brighter future was shared by both the iwi
and the crown, uh, it saddens me
that partnerships which were guaranteed
through those very settlements are now
thrown on the scrap heap.
And our value and contribution is reduced to a part
of the community that has consulted aligned
to a goal and a plan.
Uh, it saddens me that we are here again, going
through the single biggest change in environmental
legislation in my lifetime, uh,
and are afforded 10 minutes
to outline the significant impact this change will have on
the integrity of T
and the various commitments we have made to each other.
It saddens me that part two matters of the RMA, that
although limited in the scope to achieve real change,
provided a platform to recognize the relation
or connection that Iwi Maori have with the natural world,
which is crucial and deeply embedded within our identity.
It saddens me that con concepts like ua,
which are at the heart of our very existence
and are a crucial planning tool
to achieve intergenerational wellbeing,
we're never given a chance to succeed
through the perception of ambiguity.
You can take Wai out of legislation,
but you will never take Wai out of us iwi Maori.
But most of all, it saddens me
that we have legislative change in front of us
that shines a light on property rights, reducing red tape
and perceived deficiency gains
whilst pushing our obligations
and responsibilities into the shadows.
And while they sit in the shadows
and the darkness, the very limited levers we have leaned on
to get small wins, sit in the darkness with them.
To be clear from an perspective, property rights
and interests will never override obligation
and responsibility when it comes to the T and environment.
Many of you have children, nieces, nephews,
they will inherit the world
that this change will create when they ask.
What role did you play back in 2026
when the irreversible degradation
of our natural world began in the name of commercial
and financial winds?
Will you be bold enough to recount this time
and this place to own this decision that you're a part of?
I think not because we are all on a shameful
side of history today.
If you are part of this coalition government,
when you look in the mirror, I ask you,
what is it that looks back at you?
Thank you. Yeah. Part. Yeah. We wanted to leave time
For questions. Yes, time for questions.
And we do have questions,
so thank you very much for that submission.
Look, we will, uh, move first online to HOA Linden,
who has had her hand up.
Um, thank you very much for your statements.
And so I wanted to offer Ahi to you in the first instance,
because you are very clear on your concerns, um, in writing
and orally today.
Um, I wanted to ask specifically
around settlement obligations and agreements made, uh,
because it does feel like that there's a rollback, uh,
or a continued undermining of the agreements
that have been made via treaty settlement.
And, um, the fact we've already heard from the auditor
general last year on the way
that the Crown does not uphold treaty settlements
to date in the inquiry
through the Maori Affairs Select Committee.
So in terms of, um, this legislation, uh,
we know and we've seen, um, in submissions,
the deep concern, um, in the way
that this will undermine both, uh, uh,
ti rights generally,
and then those, uh, obligations that the Crown have to
through treaty settlement.
Are you able to touch on some of those areas
where you think, you know, we've, these are meant
to be binding, um, agreements,
and now we can see for the significant risk, um,
coming through on those agreements?
Um, Han uh, we think you're right.
Um, in our, uh, settlement legislation,
there's a clear intent there.
Um, the, the spirit of the wording of our settlement, uh,
refers to how we, we, we will work together.
That is the, the government ang for the betterment of our,
uh, of our environment.
And it, it definitely feels like this, that a lot of
that is being unwound, and we don't feel like we feel like
our, uh, is, uh, Robert said, our influence,
our participation in contributing to the good
of our environment is diminished. Could you be more
Specific about, uh, yeah. So,
um, in response to your question too, um,
many settlement provisions that we have made, uh,
relied on existing legislative frameworks, uh, to enable
or give effect to them, whether it be in, uh, participation
or engagement or working in partnership
with councils in central government,
or whether it be in decision making
and having an influence on the broader relational, um, uh,
relational aspects of, um, iwi Maori to their places and,
and, um, areas of significance.
Um, by removing those legislative levers
that we can pull without a clear understanding on what's
going to replace them, it puts the intent
of the settlement in jeopardy.
Mm-hmm. What I would also say, too is that, um, uh,
in our settlement experience
and many other iwi as well, uh, the journey
that we have been on with the Crown has been one of, um,
consistent progress, right?
And we have worked together to try
and understand how we can effectively contribute to outcomes
for the environment, for our communities,
for our social wellbeing that are mutually shared
and able to be enhanced, um, through the work that we do.
What we are seeing with this is that ability
to influence those outcomes being removed.
And that is a significant concern to us
as a commissioner sitting on hearings.
Um, hearing, I know the value of, uh, what's, um,
a perspective can bring
to a planning outcome when the levers
and the tools are correct, uh, by, um, devolving that
to a minister, uh, is, is incredibly
concerning to us as Iwi.
Ma,
Can I stop on that please, madam Chair?
Yes. And then we've got a few other, uh, primary
Questions. Thank you. Um, so
yeah, ministerial powers is something
that has been raised, um,
and the way that we could be vulnerable as community,
as business, as Iwi Maori, uh, to a government of the day,
how do we lock in that, you know, what's
that bipartisan space where we can have a stable system, um,
but also as Maori, do we feel like we have to go
for every lever available now?
Like there's like a closed door on, um, on any,
you know, do we feel like we have to just go and, and,
and constantly chasing right now?
Uh, yes, we do. Um,
but I, I, I think it's important not
to conflate multiple issues into the,
to the one taaka here as well.
Ministerial powers by default give too much influence
and oversight to an individual who may
or may not be capable of, um, undertaking that.
And as the NZPI said
before us, um, that carries with it a level of risk.
Um, if you don't have independence in that process, uh,
that minister has the ability to make decisions based on,
um, their understanding of what it means
and their interpretation of the act.
And that's a dangerous place to be at.
Coming back to the point though that you make around, uh,
Maori having to chase levers, we've had
to chase levers our entire existence, right?
That that hasn't stopped, whether it be a man
or an iwi management plan
or whatever, we've had to do that the entire,
the only difference now is that there is no clear benefit
or integrity to us chasing those levers, right?
So before it meant something,
and as small as that was, it actually had a value.
Now, um, that's become limited and, and, and more remote. So
Thank you. Um,
look, we'll come to Grant, uh, for a question
Now. Yeah. Thank you very much,
um, for your,
for your, uh, submission.
What I'm trying to understand is, um, the, uh,
the ministers made it quite clear that, that we are, uh,
the tree settlements
and obligations under the tree settlements are,
will be delivered on, right.
Um, where, uh, same myself as a landowner who does want
to see a, a, an enhanced environment,
and for my children, just like yours and, and,
and farmer, is if we wanna do something on our property
and we have to get a consent, right,
and we work through the process, and at what level
do you feel, what, at what level should the local, um, hapu
or iwi be part of that process?
And should their view be the ultimate view on that,
on whether a consent is granted?
Uh, iwi Maori have always, um, had a role in contributing
to what those planning, uh, measures
and, um, limits are, right?
Mm-hmm. So when we, when the council undertakes a district
plan or a na, a resource policy statement
or regional policy statement, sorry,
or district plan, um, iwi have the opportunity to contribute
to what they think their right framework
and settings are Yeah.
For that to be done. So, I I, I don't think starting
with the landowner and having a look at what iwi
or Hapu influence is, is the place to start.
I think what we, what we are arguing here mm-hmm.
Is that unless the settings are right,
that will never be right.
What happens at the, at the ground
level will never be right.
And at the moment, we've had the ability
to influence those things as a partner.
Mm-hmm. Now, there's varying degrees in which
that happens across the country as well.
Some councils do it well, some councils are on a journey
of doing it better, but
unless we have influence on that,
there will never be an outcome at the land
level that you speak of
Because, well, I, I, what I see playing out
amongst my rural colleagues is that if, if they,
if they fail to get an agreement on, on a consent,
for example, with be for farming
or irrigation from the local hapo iwi, that they, then,
they, then effectively it doesn't proceed.
It's effectively where it's got to.
And I'm, and I'm, so what, what,
what's your comment on that?
Um, I can't comment on individual aspects of a consent,
just, but, but, but,
but in, in principle, um, if there are,
if there are mechanisms that are either attached
to things like te manay or sites and areas of significance
or other things, I think is absolutely appropriate
that iwi hapu, um, have a say in
how those settings are managed at a local level.
So it's absolutely appropriate.
We, we can't, we can't belittle the role of iwi
or hapu through legislative processes that, um,
signal all efficiency to ground, uh, sorry to farmers
or landowners or users.
That is an incredibly dangerous place for us to be,
because there's no space then for the cultural
and environmental benefits that iwi strive to achieve,
as we've identified in our, there's no lever to pull.
And the minute we go down the path of making it easier
for a farmer or a landowner to get a consent for irrigation
and not consider the significance of that activity to iwi
and hapu, that's dangerous for all of us, not just you
as a farmer or a landowner.
It is dangerous to everybody.
Uh, thank you. Look, we'll move to Rachel Brooking now
for a primary question.
Thank you. Uh, and back to your settlement, uh, thank you
for the suggestion of the priority rule
for treaty settlements.
That's, um, that's very useful.
But I'm also interested in,
and thank you for worrying about integration
and the planning system.
Uh, but you note your concern on the coastal environment
and, um, that the explicit need for a regional coastal plan
and how that undermines prota your Pataki plan.
Could you, um, tell us about that and what your concern is
and, and why you think it is
that the coastal environment isn't
really considered in these two bills?
Uh, kta, thank you for this question.
So this relates to a treaty settlement provision relating
to the preparation of a arch plan in the Coasta marine
environment, which is for te
koa not far from here, the Cook Strait.
And it, and enables Naga to prepare that plan.
And that plan must be taken into account
by the regional councils, Marlborough District Council
and Greater Wellington in preparing a regional coastal plan.
Our key concern here is that we're struggling to
find provisions in the bills that give effect
to those provisions in relation to the responsibilities
of regional councils in, in the, uh,
in the coastal marine area, especially in relation
to a statement of kaki Tonga
provided in that settlement legislation.
So I think we're kind of struggling just to find how
a council would actually implement
that treaty settlement provision.
Thank you. Uh, now we will move to Lan
who has her hand up.
Koto, thank you so much for your submission today.
Um, I wanted to pick up specifically on your comments
around, uh, and its importance
because I think, um, you know, our interpretation
of whether legislation is so far is
that it will be essentially devolving
environmental limits in particular to that regional space.
But I guess an interpretation on that would be,
without the very clear direction that Timana
or Twai provides, uh, there will be
no impetus on the actual users of water
to actually, um, have a really clear driver about
where they're going and why.
Do you think there is any alternative to Timana or to why,
or are we just kind of, um,
I guess delaying some really hard decisions for the next
five or 10 years to go through processes Again?
Uh, in the interest of brevity,
we could take a whole morning to answer that question.
Uh, but, um, look in, in, in brief, um,
said about a hierarchy of considerations that put the health
and wellbeing of the, the water body at the forefront
of the decision making process.
Um, that, um, created some angst in the planning community,
but it also created a great opportunity by removing that,
once again, we are looking at water, uh,
fresh water in particular, um, as a resource
or a commodity that we can utilize at our will, uh,
based on the, the needs of human beings and industry.
Um, that is an incredibly dangerous place for us to be,
because the health and wellbeing of the water, um, as far as
is concerned, is the first
consideration we must always have.
Uh, the minute we move away from that, uh, yeah, it's,
it's a dangerous place for us to be kilda.
Look, kilda, thank you very much for your time today, uh,
for your very thorough submission and considerations there
and for coming in today in person as well.
We appreciate your time. So kilda.
So we now call on our next submitter at Culture
New Zealand, who are also joining us
in person today.
Welcome, Steph to the Select Committee this morning.
You have 20 minutes with us, um,
and we do thank you for this very thorough submission
as well, and we've got some progress here.
Thank you very much. Some handouts. We appreciate that.
Unfortunately, we can't give those to you online,
but we've been given a few little, uh, booklets here, um,
and I'm sure you'll talk to that.
So we'll hand it over to you for your opening remarks.
Great. Thank you, Koto.
Good morning, Madam Chair and Committee.
I'm the Chief Executive of AUMA Aquaculture New Zealand,
and I'm joined today by Stuart Hawthorne,
aquaculture New Zealand Board Chair
and CE of Ahima Kauna a Salmon,
and I'm also joined by Steph Hopkins Aquaculture,
new Zealand's policy manager.
I'd urge the committee in its deliberations
to consider carefully all of the aquaculture submissions
that have been lodged on these bills.
I'd like to expressly thank Marine Farmers Association,
Corman Marine Farmers, New Zealand Oyster Industry,
Mai Oyster Association, New Zealand, king Salmon Sanford,
to ahu, Ana Na Tahu,
and many other individual companies
who have submitted on these bills.
The ask of the Agricul sector is clear,
consistent, and pragmatic.
We are asking you as the committee to lead boldly.
This is a once in a generation opportunity
to ensure the regulatory settings, create a system
that works for the coastal marine environment
and aquaculture as a primary sector of New Zealand.
Some may say we are a niche primary sector.
We say at $840 million, over 3000 jobs across New Zealand,
many in regional communities.
Aquaculture is an important primary sector delivering high
quality protein domestically and to the world.
This government and previous governments are
ambitious about aquaculture.
The current aquaculture development plan
has identified aquaculture growing to $3 billion by 2035.
We say with the right regulatory settings,
aquaculture can be more than $3 billion.
We say aquaculture can achieve similar success
to the New Zealand red meat sector last year,
valued at $11.7 billion.
We say this because New Zealand has the fourth largest
exclusive economic design.
Consented Aquaculture space currently occupies less than
0.01% of the exclusive economic zag global demand
for high quality protein that is clean, safe,
and trusted is growing by the minute.
We've identified four important shifts the committee must
recognize and make recommendations on in its report.
These shifts are to embed aquaculture in the goals,
prioritize national policy direction for aquaculture,
retain controlled activity status for aquaculture,
and ensure transitional arrangements keep us moving.
I'll briefly touch on the first two of those shifts
and I'll hand to my colleague Steph.
Explicit recognition of aquaculture in the goals
of the bills is the system level hook
that signals the national importance as a primary production
and alignment with the government's
aquaculture development plan.
This ensures the decisions flow down in the planning funnel
and stay focused on enabling sustainable growth
and investment and certainty as drafted.
The marine goals and the planning bill
reads protection focused.
Without clear recognition of economic growth
and primary industries like aquaculture in the coastal
marine area, aquaculture is less likely to be planned for
and the constraints will be prioritized.
We need balance strong environmental outcomes alongside a
clear mandate to enable development where appropriate.
We've identified a simple fix with the addition
of a concise aquaculture specific goal,
and cause 11 of both bills
recognize Maori interests already hardwired
through the Maori Maori commercial aquaculture settlement
and ensure that economic growth goal explicitly covers the
coastal and marine environment.
You'll refer to that detail on pages 10
and 11 of our submission.
We also seek a comprehensive policy direction
and standards for aquaculture that applies across the marine
land base, freshwater, and open ocean aquaculture.
This will provide for aquaculture settings that are clear,
consistent, and nationally applied
while secondary to the bills.
A national policy direction is a key
part of the bill's success.
It provides the tangible
and practical benefits for aquaculture.
Aquaculture must be a priority in the development
of national policy direction.
This can be done simply with repurposing workable provisions
that currently exist backed by science
and research and evidence.
We've done thinking on what a national
policy direction would look like.
Pages 13 to 18 of our submission cover that,
but in short, a national policy direction would affirm
aquaculture as an appropriate use
with its effects well understood,
typically low localized and reversible.
The little booklet that I handed out, if you refer
to page seven, it demonstrates the benefits
of the ecosystem, benefits of aquaculture
to the marine environment.
It would remove overly restrictive settings in the current
policy framework and replace them
with balanced enabling policies.
It would provide predictability
and flexibility so operators can innovate, adapt, and grow.
And the provisions in carry encourage iwi participation,
including an enabling consenting pathway for space.
Within aquaculture settlement areas,
it would acknowledge the functional needs of aquaculture,
which depends on suitable water quality
and certain locations to operate.
And finally, it would remove the duplication
between other statutes, for example, biosecurity,
which is managed under the biosecurity Act step.
So I'm gonna cover the third and fourth points.
So our third point that we wish to make is we recommend
that controlled activity status is retained,
or that the bills provide an explicit exemption so
that the aquaculture sector can continue
to access controlled activity status,
particularly in the coastal marine area.
This is important because removing controlled
and reclassifying activities down
to restricted discretionary would erode certainty
of tenure for farmers.
That undermines confidence and bankability
and it increases business risks.
At recon. Consenting
for established farms controlled activity has been a hard
one, successful planning outcome
and key farming regions like GRA Northland,
and parts of Waikato and Tasman.
So what would we lose if controlled activity is removed?
Well, we'd lose the recon consenting certainty
for established farms.
So farmers would no longer be confident
that councils must reissue consents at expiry despite good
performance pathways for new development would be narrowed.
For example, in the proposed Waikato plan review,
they're proposing controlled activity status
for new sites within aquaculture settlement areas.
So the system would become slower and more costly,
and a greater burden of proof would be required.
Discouraging investment innovation would be hindered the
government's proposed improvements
to the national environmental standards
for marine aquaculture
that contemplate controlled activity rules
for research trials
and certain changes to consent conditions on farms would not
be implemented as government intends.
And this would reduce flexibility and innovation.
A coastal permit doesn't confer property right.
Private property rights in the same way as on land
a controlled activity consent,
where permission cannot be declined as a,
as a valuable asset.
The bill suggests that aquaculture may be able
to pay a permitted activity.
However, it is our view
that consents provides stronger bankable rights than
registered permitted activities.
They have defined terms of, say, between 20 and 35 years.
They protect existing allocation during their term,
and they provide clarity for investment.
In contrast, permitted status could theoretically be
overtaken by later plan changes, shifts in policy direction
or allocation processes, creating uncertainty.
And there's also the fact
that the crown settlement obligations to identify 20%
of space for settlement for regional iwi is triggered
by a consent application.
So that needs to remain workable.
The final point that I'd make is on transitional provisions
to keep the system moving.
We ask that the new,
as the new legislation comes into effect,
operational continuity is insured, and we avoid duplication
and inconsistency with ongoing RMA processes.
We recommend that you allow combined plans
and new national direction once completed,
to have weight in these concurrent RMA processes.
This is important. We've seen how long regional plan reviews
can take under the RMA, that was decades.
Mm-hmm. The review
of the Wacoal Regional Coastal Plan is an appeal
before the environment court.
Um, those appeals may outlast the transitional period
of this legislation.
So without clear weight given to new instruments,
we risk decisions under the RMA, that conflict
with the new framework, wasting resources
and delaying outcomes that align with government policy.
The transition should pull legacy processes toward the new
system, not let them hold it back.
Um, more detail is in our submission on pages 34 of that.
So finally, um, I would like to hand over to, um, Stuart,
our chair to give you an understanding
of the farming realities of these issues.
Morena, uh, you know, aquaculture, it's, it's long term
and there's a lot of risk for investors, uh,
uh, in that, in that sector.
You know, for example, with salmon,
it's three years from when we first produce an egg
to when we're harvesting that fish, right?
Taking Woodstock.
That's six years from when you start thinking we're thinking
about 2031 already.
Uh, and, but, and,
and we need clean, uh, water in a good environment.
And with those things we can go grow responsibly.
And these bills done right offer that opportunity
for really quite significant growth
and economic benefit to New Zealand, uh,
but also with strong environmental protection,
because we need a good environment
for that growth that happened.
Uh, New Zealand needs significant investment in aquaculture,
and in my view, the government's role is to help, uh,
to help secure that investment, is
to give the sector confidence
and to give the sector certainty.
Uh, and for us, uh, having, you know, the focus
for me today is, is, is, is to request
that there would be national policy directions
for agriculture are, are foundational up to
that confidence and certainty.
If, if we can get national, uh, policy directions
for agriculture included in this early stages, uh,
that means we can have progress now, not stalled
and waiting to understand the, the landscape.
It means we can have clear rules applied nationally,
and it means we can have science-based rules, uh,
again, applied nationally.
And so, you know, what I would like to see out of, out
of this process is that you, this committee is recommended
to government with national pro policy directions
for agriculture being included in the initial priorities,
uh, when the bills are enacted, uh, with no delays.
And if you do that, then what we can do as a farmers,
as farmers is we can invest for growth.
Uh, we can get more production from existing sites,
and we can get additional new sites consented
to increase the productivity from aquaculture.
Uh, so from existing sites, what could we do?
Uh, uh, we could realign our sites using science.
Just shift them a bit.
The first sites for eloa salmon were consented
more than 40 years ago.
Uh, and things have moved on.
We've known more now than we did 40 years ago.
Uh, and so why is it difficult
and challenging to move a site, uh,
a short distance away to realign things?
Uh, why is that very high cost? It doesn't need to be.
It should be straightforward.
Uh, regulations should be consistent and science-based, uh,
and it should be appropriate for the impact.
And, and setting national standards for those types
of things are, in my view, are very important to build
that confidence to investors to invest in the sector
for freshwater regulations.
Uh, there, there's proposals to extend licenses, uh, to 2031
that should be longer to give us more time
to prepare for these changes.
Uh, and indeed the extensions should be included
for licenses that are already approaching 35 years
and beyond, uh, which currently is excluded,
and there should be standards set nationally.
So that's the national policy.
Directions are needed for that.
Uh, and, and also for ASAs agricultural settlement areas.
Why is it not straightforward to convert an
as SA into a marine farm?
Why is that high risk? It shouldn't be high risk.
It shouldn't be onerous or expensive.
It should be assumed that an a SA is going
to have marine farming happening in it.
And if we can have a SA being brought into the, uh,
marine farming landscape,
then existing companies can partner
with EV to bring those to life.
Thank you.
Look, thank you very much for your submission
and those firsthand experiences unique to aquaculture.
Look, we have got a few questions, so we'll move first
to Rachel Brooking, who is on Zoom.
Thank you. Uh, a clarification and then a question.
And, uh, we are talking
before about how, um, coastal environment,
it's a common resource
and you get that asset was the word used, um,
by getting a permission to use it.
And you're talking about the permitted activities
and then going to restrict restricted discretionary.
I, I presume that that means that you're not opposed
to controlled, it's a certainty that you want
and you're not opposed to a a levy.
That's one question. Um,
and then the other question is about the, the effects
that aquaculture has.
So you've said that they're well understood and reversible.
Um, can you explain what you mean by that?
All effects of aquaculture are reversible
and, um, also the difference
and effects may be between, um, the
closer the insurer in the, in the offshore.
I think that would be useful
for the committee to understand.
Um, Gilda, Rachel, um, we, um, we support the ability
to have a controlled activity status for,
um, for aquaculture.
Um, as, as we've set out in our submission, um,
we don't believe that permitted activity gives us the,
the same sort of guarantees, um, long term.
Um, even though on the surface it would sounds like it would
be, would be great to be a permitted activity.
We really like the certainty that a consent provides.
Um, in terms of, um, you ask in terms of a levy,
the, the proposed bills do set out a new levy structure.
Um, we, we don't, um,
we don't have strong points on that.
We, we do raise in our submission that, um, that it seems
that they've retained the coastal occupation charges in
addition to a new levy.
So we've identified that that seems
to be duplication and mm-hmm.
We would query what, um, what the purposes of those,
those two mechanisms are.
Um, also a, a levy seems to be, um, able
to be applied more broadly rather than just to the, um,
occupiers of space, like a coastal occupation charge is.
And so perhaps it has, um, more utility in that, um,
and that it might be able to be applied more broadly, um,
in, in that context.
Uh, in terms of the, your second question,
T did you want to talk to environmental?
I can look of that in terms of reversibility of a fax, uh,
you know, you, if you've got a salmon farm or a muscle farm
and you remove it, you immediately
remove the visual impacts.
It's gone as soon as you take those surface structures away.
And then the seabed impacts within a matter of months
or maybe two
or three years, the seabed will be back to the way it was
before the fish farm was there.
So they're completely reversible.
Uh, you know, you remove the beehive, uh,
this building here, how long
before we get back to Native forest?
It's centuries, uh, agriculture's not like that.
The, the effects are well understood from research done
overseas and here in New Zealand, uh,
and they are reversible.
And so the, the, the regulatory approach should be enabling
and should be aware of that
and taking that into account and shouldn't be onerous.
And what about, um, effects on other biodiversity, uh,
submarine mammals in particular?
Penguins?
Uh, well, it, there's been work done in New Zealand on
those, on those issues, uh,
and, uh, they haven't found any significant, uh, effects,
in fact, for muscle farms.
Uh, they often act as, uh, an attractant for these animals
and actually increase the biodiversity.
So there's opportunities for agriculture to be seen as a,
as a net benefit, uh, as well as having regards effects
And any difference between insure and offshore.
I, I think there's, there's less research on offshore, uh,
but the effects are, uh, equally reversible,
uh, in that environment.
Thank you. Look, I just wanted
to ask a supplementary on Rachel's first question
around retaining controlled activity status
because, uh, you mentioned in your submission that if
that was removed, that pathways
for new farmers would be challenged.
Uh, can you elaborate a little further on that?
Um, um, yes, certainly.
So, um, as I, as I said, some, um, some,
uh, well, so we envisage that, um,
national policy direction could provide the, the, the
guidance that sets that in some places, for example,
if regional spatial plans were to identify areas appropriate
for aquaculture, that they may be then suitable
to be controlled activity depending on
how much upfront work has done.
Particularly also, we, we suggest that it's possible that,
for example, aquaculture settlement areas
where the government has already done a lot of groundwork
to identify those areas as appropriate for aquaculture, um,
as part of that settlement process, that they could also be,
for example, controlled activity
and that would remove a lot of the, uh, the, the, um,
the onerous or the, the, the burden of proof at,
at the application stage.
So does, so is that the reason that you are thinking
that it may mean that we don't see
as much growth within the sector
and as many, um, farmers, you know, wanting to proceed?
I think the, um, the main value for in,
across, across New Zealand, the main value
for controlled activity is in our established farms.
Okay. That have controlled activity Yeah.
Already under regional coastal plans. Yeah.
And so is seen our, our existing sector sees that
as it would be a, a loss of certainty
for our existing sector.
So that's the, the main crux of it. Okay.
If, if I just, and because, just
because it is quite interesting
that you are asking this within your submission,
because it is obviously quite unique
to aquaculture, would you say,
Um, well, as I understand it, um, other,
other submitters have also asked, they have
To be retained. Yeah. They have this
in specific relation to aquaculture.
Um, yes. I I think
because aquaculture, um,
is undertaken in predominantly in the coastal marine area,
controlled activity is, um, is a really valuable,
uh, setting to have. Yes. Yep.
Okay. No, no, no, it's, uh, it's a really good point.
Thank you. Look, um, did you have a supplementary on that?
No, I just, oh, okay.
We will just move Tolan Farm who's had her hand up online.
Koto, thanks so much for your submission.
Um, I'm just wondering if you can help the committee
understand, because you know, we are aware
that you've had this blanket extension applied
to all coastal marine permits out to 2050.
So how does it actually apply the things you're talking
about in terms of, um, you know, allowing, um,
I guess innovation and that kind of thing?
How does that work when you know you do have
certainty out to 2050?
What is actually gonna be driving innovation in the sector,
given that you're sort of locked in
existing practices till then?
Um, thank you for your question.
Um, we, we would say that, uh,
the national environmental standard for marine aquaculture,
which, um, was, uh, put well discussed
and released in July last year and had submissions
provided for, uh, pilots, trials, uh, realignment of farms
to be controlled activities.
So that's the necessary settings that we need
for aquaculture to understand the,
the natural environment that we're in.
So that ability to pilot
and trial technologies, um, is enabled,
um, by those provisions.
And that's a controlled setting in the standard.
And, and then also add to that, that, um,
when you're regulated by a consent that has a range
of consent conditions that control what you can do, um,
what we, um, what we want the ability to do in terms
of flexibility and innovation is to be able to actually, um,
farm different things, farm in a different way in the
future, adapt to our changing environment.
I mean, we are finding climate change is changing faster
than regulations can keep up.
So, um, farmers are really finding it, um,
quite a challenging operating environment at the moment.
And when you are really constrained by consent conditions
around what you can do on farm, that's hard.
Yeah, that's really hard. And so what we are finding is, um,
that's why national direction would be a really powerful
thing to allow us the,
certainly both the flexibility on one hand
to do creative innovative things on farm to farm better, uh,
more productively on the sites that we have,
but also the certainty on the other, at the other spectrum
around our, our continued, uh, uh, oc, um,
ability to be seen as a, a appropriate
Brilliant look, thanks for your submission today.
We are gonna have to leave it there.
Um, some really interesting insights, um,
and that are very unique to agriculture.
So we do appreciate your time. Thank you very much.
Um, look, with keeping in the theme, um,
of our marine areas, we are now gonna move to, uh,
the Coromandel Marine Farmers Association who are going
to join us, uh, via Zoom.
So we're just going to welcome them
through online this morning.
Oh, there we go. I can see you both there.
Welcome to the select committee this morning.
Uh, you've got 20 minutes with us, so we'll hand it over
to you for your opening introductions.
Uh, morning.
Uh, we are the co Coman Marine Farmers Association being
represented today by Nicole and Chloe.
Um, we've also
provided a, um, submission to the committee,
but to aid our submission, we've, um, got a PowerPoint
that we'd like to share as we go through.
Hopefully that's, um, firstly going to work and Okay.
With the committee.
Yes, thank you. We are just starting
the screen share. There we go.
Okay.
Is that coming through? Okay. Yes,
We can see that.
Beautiful. Um, what you'll see there is a shot of, um,
Cokie Island, rat Island just to the north of Cora Mandel.
Um, and also our background today, um,
the Coromandel Marine Farmers Association as our,
our submission set out, um, represent a group
of marine farmers in the Corman, Auckland
and Waikato region.
Um, and we're have 44 members.
Our industry employs 143 people across farms, um,
processing payroll, things like that,
and bring in approximately $13.4 million.
Um, our industry offers employment opportunities in remote
parts of the country during nont tourist seasons,
and Maori also significant significant investors in the
industry, and many Maori are employed within the sector.
Um, that's a brief background to, um, our organization,
but you have our full submissions.
And today what we'd like to, um, give you,
and we're glad we've followed up from aquaculture
New Zealand, is just some real world, uh,
practical examples in our region of how the RMA currently,
um, has impacted on aquaculture, um,
and how we hope
that these reforms will support our industry going forward.
So the four key points that we'd like the select committee
to take away, uh, today, uh, we'd like to see aquaculture
as a goal in these two, um, two bills.
Uh, our industry needs certainty.
We need consistency, uh,
and given the state of our current, um, one, one part
of our, um, area is covered by the Waikato region
with a coastal plan that's currently in train
and under appeal, we'd like
to see strength in transitional provisions so
that any benefits that we can gain from these RMA reforms
are then, um, immediately gleaned by industry.
While our appeal, um, the appeal of the coastal plan goes
through,
Um, section 11 of both the bill sets out the goals
for legislation and, um, we would like
to see aquaculture as a goal there.
And currently only land is referred to, um,
but we'd like to see it apply equally
to both water and land.
Uh, aquaculture differs very much from, um,
land-based activities,
and we suggest, um, that the wording could be supporting
and enabling existing
and new aquaculture implementing, including
by implementing central government aquaculture strategies
or aquaculture development plans.
The fundamental issue is a lack
of reg recognition in the current wording of the bills
to use and the development of coastal waters.
Aquaculture differs from land-based activities,
and the new system must recognize
that aquaculture is appropriate
and has a functional, functional,
and operational need to operate in the coastal marine area.
Aquaculture's effects are low impact well understood,
and as aquaculture New Zealand, um, just explained earlier,
reversible as an industry, we need flexibility
to undertake trial and research
and make changes on our marine farms,
and we have extensive science underpin underpinning the
management of farms,
which informs our practices and standards.
The next key goal that we'd like to, um, get across
to the committee today is surety.
All on water activities require resource consent.
And what the industry really needs is surety
that when we go forward with our, um,
marine farming activity, we have controlled activity status.
So in the long term, um, anything that we put in place
has, um, we have the confidence
and surety that it will, um, be allowed for in the future.
Within the Corman context, Wilson Bay has played a, sorry.
Good.
That right. Uh, Wilson Bay has played a l Wilson Bay,
which sits at the base of the Kora.
Mendel has played a long important role for the area,
and it's currently excluded from Nsma and is
therefore reliant on, um, council's coastal plans,
and in this case the Waikato Council Coastal Plan
and providing certainty to the industry.
Um, the Waikato Regional Coastal Plan provides for this area
as a controlled activity.
Um, so you can see we've got already, um,
quite a few differences in our region where we've got one,
um, area operating under controlled activity status,
and the rest are not.
Hi there. Uh, Chloe, obviously,
I'm sitting here with Nicole.
Um, I'm not a planner, by all means.
I'm here to more offer a practical viewpoint on
how farmers are in today's world
and how we trying to operate.
So when, when, in terms of research
and development, um,
we obviously need critical infrastructure.
We are needing support, like
what Nicole was saying in A QNZ is, is surety
and certainty that us as farmers are able
to renew consents
and to continue farming for generations to come.
So, for example, from a practical perspective, uh, we,
uh, went through a consenting process, which
was actually called the fowl.
So the fowl is a location based on the east coast
of the Coromandel Peninsula.
There are only two other farms currently placed on the East
coast, being Port Charles
and Kennedy Bay,
which currently have farms in them right now.
What we wanted to do was we looked
as a family as well, um, some time ago, about 10, eight
to 10 years ago, we saw that there was going
to be a dip in spat in terms of the,
how much fat would be available for industry.
Um, spat is obviously a microscopic muscle,
which is predominantly lands on 90 Mile Beach far north,
and obviously caught on seaweed
and in distributed amongst farmers in industry.
So what the foul foul was
and is trying to still be it, we are trying
to get a spat catching farm on the east coast.
Wonderful. Yes, we have retained a consent,
which is wonderful, which unfortunately took eight years,
$2 million, and the fact that there's still no certaincy.
So the fact is we're sitting here going, what just happened?
Yeah, in a summary, we have nothing is in the water.
The consent was granted a couple years ago
and nothing is in the water.
Why we have the most tedious consent conditions that
are beyond, well, everything's achievable,
but how you go about it,
we cover it extensively when a QNZ, you are talking to them,
whether it be about mammals or biosecurity or whatnot.
We have all those management plans in place, for example,
for this and other farms that are already consented.
And, and well in process the fact that we wanted,
we saw that there needed to be a change.
We didn't wanna rely on one source of spat, so we thought,
let's obviously trialed,
but proven applied for a area eight years,
like I said, $2 million, and what have we gotta show for it?
So that is definitely an example of
where the current system is not working for us
for farmers to continue.
Wow. There's also, for example, I'll get Nicole to speak
to it a bit more about another example for infrastructure
around wolves.
Um, on top of what Chloe's saying about
what infrastructure we need in the water, um,
marine farming's also really reliant on wolves,
roads and moorings.
Um, the barges come in and, uh, tie up to the wolves
and moorings, and they offload all their product
into trucks, which are then taking, taken along roads
to processing factories and then exported overseas.
Um, in the coman, currently we've got aging.
Uh, wha the primary wharf here is, um, is aging
and not fit for purpose, not fit for expansion.
If we, if aquaculture were to expand, to increase the amount
of product that's taken out of Coromandel.
Um, so in 2012, um,
it was first mooted about upgrading, um, the,
the wharf here, the primary
wharf, which is called Sugar Life.
Um, and it's 2026.
Um, we've, we gained consent for it in, um, just
before COVID, I think it was 2019.
It was appealed all the way up to the high court, uh,
at great cost expense and time.
And that there is still nothing in the water.
And, um, as an association because of COVID and inflation
and other things, um, we now have to look at, um,
how the costs have escalated for the wharf
and what budget there was prior to COVID is not suitable now
to finish the wharf.
So, um, that's an ongoing issue, uh, for marine farmers
about how much more time we have with that wharf and,
and how are we going to expand as an industry on a wharf
that's getting older and older that we can't upgrade.
Sorry, that's, um, this is the photo of
what the wharf would look like one day if we can build it.
Wow. So that's a, um, model, a three dimensional model.
Wow, that doesn't surprise me.
So, um, and to, to give you background in the operate,
the area we operate,
we have two different regional councils.
Um, the farms we talked about
before, uh, Chloe's, uh, talked about as just to the north,
um, slightly off this photo.
Um, but we all operate under Auckland Council
and Wata Regional Council.
Um, and both councils have vastly different, um,
coastal plans and how they assess the impacts
of marine farming on the same body of water
is extremely different down to the, um,
conditions on the consents for biosecurity,
for marine mammals, for bonds, for the color of floats
that sit on the marine farms.
Both councils on the same body
of water have very vastly different, um,
reasons on how they look at these consents
and how the consents have been issued.
Just to note on that, um,
another inconsistency would be cost.
So we all understand that different industries, uh, uh,
facing all sorts of different costs.
Now, when we talk about the inconsistency at the moment
with essentially two different councils, is
what Nicole was saying, is yes,
the conditions are different,
the compliance costs are vastly different, uh, depending on
how they charge, whether it's per hectare
or monitoring cost on top of it,
or maybe there's an audit cost
or maybe there's nothing for the year
or then it pops up again.
There is a real inconsistency on
what we are trying to achieve.
Of course, we are bound to consent conditions, we understand
that as farmers, but
what we are just wanting is consistency across all.
As Nicole said, it is one body of water.
Why, why are they so vastly different?
It, it, it's just inconsistent within businesses
and how they operate and budgeting
and among many other factors, which just make it,
to be honest, very stressful.
Uh, the amount of different things that come in and out
and what they require of you
and what they don't, it,
it does play a toll on you over time.
So if there was more consistency
and alignment with that, then it would be more achievable
and hopefully easier to just work together that that's
how we are seeing it at the moment.
Questions And lastly, um,
and agriculture New Zealand touched on this briefly.
Um, our coastal plan for the Waikato region has only just,
um, at the very beginning of its journey, um,
if we compare it to
where Borough's coastal plan is currently in the many,
many years, it's taken them to get to where they are.
Um, we're at the beginning.
So if the select committee do come
to some decisions about the RMA, um, we'd love to be able
to gain those benefits immediately.
Um, so really strengthen these tra
and transitional provisions so that we are not waiting
until the coastal plan has gone
through the environment court to gain those.
Um, whether that's flexibility for, um, trialing, spat,
trialing, different marine farming methods, um,
or new water space.
We'd really love to get those benefits immediately from
whatever is, um, the decision on these RMA reforms.
So, um, very careful wording around that.
So we could as an industry, gain those benefits
and circling back around.
So these are our, our points, again, aquaculture as a goal,
surety as an industry, consistency
and strengthen transitional provisions.
Um, thank you for your time today and hearing from us.
We really appreciate it as an industry.
Yeah, thank you. Look, thank you very much for that, uh,
very thorough submission
and enlightening us of, uh, many of the challenges
that you've faced under the current RMA and the cost
and time, um, that it's taking.
So, uh, we appreciate that.
Look, we have only got time for one question this morning,
so we're going to give that to Grant McCullum.
Yeah, good. Thank you very much.
You've, uh, given us a big, big example
of the why we're going through this process.
Um, I'm just, just refresh with the,
with the wharf infrastructure.
'cause I was gonna ask the, I ran outta time
to ask the Air Question Zealand about
the land-based infrastructure.
So we just, were you building a completely,
a completely new place or was it replacing what was there?
I didn't quite pick that bit up.
Um, it's replacing what's there,
and it's not just for the benefit of, um, industry,
it's actually also replacing the recreational wharf that,
um, people in Corman will come up and use.
So that's also sitting right next to the, uh, wharf
that industry use.
So it was a part and parcel.
We increasing the, we're bringing benefits of the increase
of, of the wharf being upgraded to industry
and to, um, people who use it recreationally
to go fishing in the hierarchy Gulf. So
What were the principle objections
to you just replacing the wharf?
What, what, what has taken so long?
This is something I get really frustrated.
Building boat ramps and all this type
of thing is just almost impossible at times.
Takes forever. What were the principle objections?
What were the concerns were raised?
Um, it went all the way through
to the high court, I believe.
And um, some of it was around noise of actually building it
Oh, for God's Sake.
Um, and the design.
Um, and yeah, it was principally noise, um, by the,
the residents that live nearby.
Look Thank you very much for your submission this morning
and, uh, for highlighting all those points.
That's really useful for us,
so we will need to leave it there.
But thank you for your time, for your time.
No, thank You very much. Thank
You, team.
Yeah, very, uh, interesting overview
of the agriculture challenges.
So thank you. Look, uh, members, we are going
to take a short break for 10 minutes
and we will resume at 10 15 for our next submission.
Right? What have we got next?
Oh, yes, Dion. Oh, there he is. Hello, Dion.
Hello again, grant. How are you?
Very good. So, right, well, we will, uh,
I've got everyone back online.
Uh, we'll kick back into our next session on the RMA reform,
uh, and we welcome Canterbury Regional Council, uh,
and we can see you there.
So you have 20 minutes with us this morning.
Uh, we'll hand it over to you for your introductions
and to talk us through your submission,
but do take it as red and then we'll open up for questions.
Excellent. Uh, yeah, good morning, uh, Madam Chair,
Catherine, and, uh, and Grant, uh, good to see you.
Uh, to my left, I've got, uh, deputy chair, young Cromwell,
and to my right, I have, uh, Megan mackay.
And to my left, left, I have, uh, technical staff, um,
supporting us here, Oliver Cook.
So again, thank you for the opportunity to, uh, speak,
and this Canterbury, uh, is one of believe two, uh,
councils speaking on behalf of Canterbury.
Uh, it's really good that we are here,
and I appreciate that you've given us the time
and giving the time for Canterbury's voice to be heard.
Um, as you'll see from our submission, we agree that the,
uh, system needs to change.
Uh, it costs too much
and it takes too long to get things done,
which is the premise for what this government's all about.
Uh, and the RMA as, as everybody sort of says,
hasn't delivered on the economic
and environmental goals that we want.
And we can, we can debate the reasons why,
but the fact is that the change is needed
and it takes too long, obviously, to get those things done.
But we are in a period of unprecedented change, uh,
simplification for local government rates, caps,
emergency management, the change of, uh, ert, uh,
and with a lot on the line.
Uh, we just want to make one caution
and making sure that the everything you do is looking at the
implementation and the successful implementation
of this resource management act.
That is the number one goal and the number one prize.
Getting the Resource Management Act in place
and successfully implemented we'll make sure
that everything else flows down, uh,
and is successful underneath it.
Uh, we think there's too much change happening at once,
and that does risk the whole system falling over.
Um, we want to make sure
that consensus based decision making is, um,
is all part
of the appointment in the spatial planning committee, uh, so
that otherwise it's becoming politically challenging
and potentially slow in a large region like Canterbury.
Uh, we also want to make sure the fast system
that upholds elected mandate of members
and, uh, preserves ity based arrangements at place.
Uh, then the legislation must include clauses
that guarantee those representations, uh,
for local authorities and ua.
Uh, so what I'll do is, um, from there I'll hand over to,
uh, yen to touch on some of those points.
Uh,
uh, yes, uh, we support a system
where more decisions, uh, are made up upfront, uh,
through the spatial plans and also combined plans.
And I suppose fewer decisions are made, uh,
through consents,
but for this system to work our regional councils
and must be at the table, uh,
when decisions on spatial plans are made, uh,
the bills don't GU guarantee this.
And it's an area where change, uh, is needed, uh,
to be fu uh, to be, uh, future proof.
The resource management system, uh, must uphold ti
and partnership with mana.
Um, and there's one, one way of probably achieving this, uh,
is through the Maori goal.
Um, we know, uh, with the current RMA system
through part two, uh, especially specifically 67 a
and eight, uh, where the, the principles, uh,
Tiga are upheld.
Uh, so we would see this, um, whereas if part two,
that those specific clauses were moved over into the Maori
goal, that this could be achieved gild,
I'll hand over to Megan mackay
Koto. So I've been asked
to briefly highlight seven technical
issues that we think are really important
for the select committee to understand in terms
of the Canterbury context.
Uh, the first is on allocation.
So we, we accept that the current first
and first serve model is imperfect,
but we also are concerned that the proposed shift
to moving access to natural resources from established users
and communities, uh, will actually go towards those
who have the deepest pockets with the new allocation models.
Second is, um, regulatory and non-regulatory tools.
So we support regional council retaining core
resource management functions,
but we are concerned that the bill too narrowly is drafted
and it doesn't provide properly for non-regulatory tools
that sometimes and often achieve better outcomes
and faster, uh, faster outcomes
for environmental protection.
Um, and in Canterbury, this is seen
through our farm environment plans that show
how regulation works really well with advice and data
and practical support, and it can drive real outcomes.
Uh, and our recent audits show really good results.
Um, so from 2017 to now, a grade audits have,
they started in 2017 as only 14% were achieving a grades.
And our latest audit shows that 77% achieve a grades. Wow.
Yeah. And c and d grades of audits dropped from 12% to 2%.
So great, great combination of regulatory
and non-regulatory working together.
Uh, next is the goals of the, uh, natural environment bill.
They sound positive,
but we do not believe that they go strong enough to, uh,
get real improvements of environmental outcomes.
Uh, we think that the bill should require that
where the environment is already in a good condition
that is maintained,
but where it's degraded that it must be improved,
it should also protect human wellbeing
and not just human health.
And a example
of this in the Canterbury context is bromley at the moment
where communities are seriously affected by odor
and similar discharges.
And this issue, um, goes
beyond neatly fitting within a human health framework
on environmental limits.
Um, we support mandatory limits framework,
and we consider this to be one of the strongest parts
of the reform, but the limits only work if they're set
early, they're enforced properly,
and they're backed by accountability and practical tools.
So the core set of eco ecosystem health limits needs
to be in place before spatial planning begins.
And I know that you've heard this from a number of parties.
Um, otherwise we risk planning, um,
before the environmental bottom lines are clear.
And also, power and accountability must travel together.
If decisions are made at the center
and it results in a limit being breached,
then regional council should not be left carrying the
responsibility and cost of putting that right.
Uh, next is a regulatory relief
framework, which you've heard much about.
We understand the intent,
but the current framework pushes too much cost
and legal risk onto councils and local communities.
From a regional council perspective,
our concern is primarily with protection
of the natural environment, and particularly SNAs
and biodiversity rather than matters like heritage.
If councils protect those values, then they must, they will,
they may face compensation liability,
but if they do not go far enough,
then they may face challenge for not protecting them.
So that puts councils into a really impossible position
in a risk of managing environmental protection financially.
Um, and it's financially punitive
for councils and communities.
The last two points that we wanted to bring
to your attention on technical is permitted limits
and the registration system.
So we do support, um, better dance data, uh,
but councils have already been investing heavily into this.
Rather than requiring each council
to build a new local system at its own cost, we encourage,
um, that information to be pulled into a centralized system.
And as drafted, the framework also re risk increasing
transaction costs for resource users
through the approval certification fees
and repeated processes every three years.
And we think that this goes against
what central government is actually
intending to drive costs down.
Finally, on transitional, um, arrangements, um,
this really will determine whether
or not the reform succeeds or stalls.
We need really clear switch on
and switch off points so
that resource users are only dealing
with one system at a time.
We need expiring consents to be managed carefully so
that the system does not create a reconsent bulge
or an equity for users.
And so in the Canterbury context,
what this means is we have about 6,000 consents
that will be affected, uh,
and about 1,150 will expire on the
31st of December, 2027 alone.
So what we encourage is, um,
a fixed extension from each consents current expiry date,
and that would be much more workable rather than
coming to face Cliff.
So there are the technic aspects that we really wanted
to bring to your attention, and we welcome questions.
Thank you.
Brilliant. Well, thank you very much for that submission.
Um, we're gonna move to Lan farm first for a question.
Thanks so much for an excellent submission.
Um, I wanted to pick up
particularly on your request to remove
clauses 51 4.
And this is the one that, um, currently allows for councils
to, or decision makers, whoever's making the decision
to set ecosystem limits that are less stringent
than national standards
or limit the use of this power where, um,
basically elevated pollution levels are the result
of natural processes.
What is your intention with the removal of that?
So I'll start. Um, so, so the intent of of that is
to say there need, if there's going
to be environmental bottom lines, they,
they must be consistent environmental bottom lines.
If you actually have a system that, um, allows for, um,
exceptions to become the norm, then
that's actually a really difficult, um, system
to regulate and monitor.
And it actually also puts additional costs onto council.
Uh, if we are not involved in, in,
in determining the spatial plans and,
and being part of the spatial planning framework,
we are some we are,
and then the environmental limits are
set slightly outside of that.
And then there's exceptions to it that require action plans,
then it actually puts the responsibility
for implementing spatial plans over into council when we
might not actually have guaranteed seat
or voice in those spaces.
And that's why we've asked for, um,
those points along the lines of we want to be part
of the regional spatial plan.
We want mano to be part of it
and part of the decision making group.
And that's also why we're strongly advocated
that regional council actually needs
to chair those spatial plans.
Thank you. Can I just ask a quick supple on that chair?
Yes, go for it. Thank you.
So, I mean, can White has had such a
history, uh, particularly over the last decade
of being engaged in regional
and local decisions about particularly water,
but about the environment generally?
Um, do you think, when you talk about the transition
to this new model, um, are we essentially,
do you see any hope that we might actually
get somewhere different in terms
of like achieving actual environmental outcomes?
Or is this simply essentially like another, say,
decade long where we sort of talk about where we might get
to in local communities, try to, you know, get to,
to a new outcome, but we might not actually get any
positive benefit from that?
I might, I might say something there,
LAN I think you could talk about the technical side of this,
but, but a lot of this is gonna be
political stuff at the moment.
And what I'm worried about
and what we've been talking about here is
that there's a lot going on
and that you might lose
that sight of what you are talking about.
So with everything that's going on at the moment with, with,
um, a number of the reforms, uh, a lot of that stuff
that you are talking about could potentially get lost.
And that's where you must, must, uh, still have voices
of people who are looking at that space, looking at
that stuff, uh, that you don't lose, that you don't lose
that institutional knowledge.
And that's the bit that we're worried about is
that institutional knowledge getting lost
because there must be a voice for that, uh, moving forward
so that it's there in there that you've got the voices of
that because the TAs, you know, they're going
to be looking at their regional spatial plan,
their land use plans, and the environmental chapter is
where these things will, will, will land.
Uh, and that's, that's the risk.
Thank you. Grant also has a supplementary on this up
On that. Um, you just,
I just wanna clarify something.
You talked about the, um, environmental limits being set,
uh, having one, one set of rules,
but are you talking across the country or just your region?
Well, environmental limits
for impacts on human health will be set in national level.
So I imagine that's gonna be relatively
consistent across the nation.
Yeah. But, um, the on ecological health will be set
at the regional level.
And so I think that's quite site specific,
which is, is appropriate.
Okay. Thank you. Just wanted to clarify that.
Thank you. Thank you. We'll now move to Priyanka.
Um, thank you. And thanks
for your very in depth written submission, um, as well.
I just had a question around the point you've made on
market-based allocation.
Um, I note
that your preference in your written submission is for that
to be removed, um, entirely,
but failing that, you've mentioned the need
for stronger guardrails.
Um, presumably one of that would be sort
of harder environmental limits.
Um, but I was wondering if you wanted to expand on what you,
uh, envisioned those guardrails could look like.
Do you? Yep, yep. Okay. Sure.
Um, so the reason that we,
we've raised a concern about market mechanisms.
Um, they sound really efficient in theory,
but in practice they actually concentrate natural resources
into the hands of those who are most able to pay.
And that really matters for Canterbury.
'cause we have a really large farming footprint here,
and agriculture is a really big part of our GDP, so we want
to make sure that the settings are actually right.
Um, and a price based allocation risks sidelining,
broader community outcomes
and resilience and food production.
So in terms of guardrails,
there's different ways that you can do it.
You might have a mixed model approach
where it is some first and first serve.
Um, you might have some market based approach.
But ultimately our core goal here is to make sure that
we are not going to create an artificial scarcity
of natural resources based on market assumptions.
And that what we're actually doing is actually securing, um,
community re resilience and food production here in Bury
and our GDP and our economic development.
So a mixed model approach.
Okay. Cool. Thank you. Thank you.
Um, look, I'm gonna jump in with a quick question.
Um, page 28, you talk about replacement
of expiring consents.
You mentioned it there in your submission that you know,
Canterbury, you've got 6,000 consents
and 1500 up for expiry.
Can you just put this into a bit of a practical context
so we understand,
'cause appreciate that you may have a lot more water
consents being such a large primary sector than obviously,
um, a perhaps some other regions which may be particularly
unique to Canterbury.
So you're looking for the total
amount of consents that we have.
If you, if you're looking at that from that point of view,
uh, we, if you look at the, the numbers
of just looking at it here, um,
there's 6,877 consents that are coming up
to expiring within the next
calendar year, uh, for Canterbury.
That's quite a lot. The majority
of those are discharge consents, uh,
and, um, yeah, they're for, for land use and farming.
So it is, it is, as you say, primarily
because of the farming nature of our land use.
Yeah. But, but what, what are you specifically asking
for there in terms of, um, that transitional period?
Um, so just so that we can understand the,
the practical nature of it,
That it doesn't occur at once.
Mm-hmm. So transition shouldn't occur at once.
What that will create is a scramble for all of the planners,
the lawyers, um, and commissioners and experts.
It's gonna drive up costs for the end user and us.
So we are looking for something that's go, going
to be a little bit further, further timed out,
and actually more thought into what should happen when.
So set the environmental limits, set the health limits,
do the spatial planning,
and then enable transition
to actually occur within that framework.
So it might be more staggered,
and we're specifically asked for the end date,
the drop dead date to actually tie into the existing
consents rather than albeit a particular date.
Okay. And that also would tie into that, um,
market based, uh, certainty as well
that we've talked about Grant is,
and, you know, there is that market based certainty
around those consents
and the expiry that you really do
need to get on top of as well.
Okay. Tha thank you.
Look, we're just going to move to Hua who has a question.
Um, I wanted to acknowledge the longstanding relationship,
um, that you have had with Iwi Maori
and the for many, many years.
Um, and while we have now the, um, representation act
that's come through, um, can you give us a bit
of an education in terms of that,
that strengthened connection with man
over, over these years?
How it has contributed to better decision making
and governance, but also in operations?
Um, yeah. So, uh, since the,
when the commissioners came back in, uh, 2009, 2010, uh,
that enabled, uh, man, I suppose a foot in the door.
Uh, and it also enabled us to have a,
a commissioner at the table.
And it was the first time in a sense for, uh, to be part of
that in the, in the regional context.
Um, but what that has done is it enabled, uh, fin to have,
uh, been involved in plan, the plan,
the planning, and the plan changes.
Okay. Uh, and it has probably, I mean,
there has been figures before,
but it has probably limited the amount of, uh, issues in,
uh, going to the environment court
because I mean, I suppose similar to what we are trying to,
what in our presentation when we said, uh, UA need to be at,
at the front, especially in the spatial planning
and in combined plans, uh, that's
what we have probably achieved over the years of having, uh,
mana at the, you know, at, at the, at the coalface boat, so
to speak, at the start of, of processes.
I mean, it hasn't always been, you know, it hasn't always,
uh, achieved everything because, uh, man,
always have the have the right to, to say no.
Uh, we wanted it to, to go further,
but, uh, it's enabled the conversations to happen.
Uh, it's enabled, um, the relationship between UA
and KOKI thar to strengthen.
Uh, and that has shown with, um, you know, over time that,
uh, that all councilors, well majority of councilors, agreed
to continue the relationship
and have two ua uh, set on, on the ko.
Megan, do you have anything else there?
No, I just think that we've got lots of examples
of working really well together
and that it actually streamlines decision making
and actually makes it more cost efficient
and easier for, uh, not just council,
but those communities to voice.
Thank you. Look, we'll just take one last
supplementary from Grant McCullough. Yeah.
Just on this, this area, um, I had feedback from, um,
farming families in, in the in Canterbury region
where they apply for their consent to farm
and they're having to consult with, uh, uh,
the local iwi hapu.
And, and it's, and it's as part of that process.
And, and, and they, they, they, they feeling that
unless they get agreement from from them that they,
that they, uh, consents unlikely to proceed.
And I would've thought that that would be better at the,
at the, at the, uh, planning
stage rather than down at the actual
consent application stage.
Yep. Totally agree with you.
And in fact, that's where we see this,
this shift is actually better
because what, what the last RMA set up was an aerial
material system that actually everybody was a loser moving
it front loading at all to the planning stage is actually
where the conversation should be.
But unfortunately, the way that the spatial planning is set
up, Maori don't have a voice there.
So we still don't have the sessions right
in this current reform.
So, um, it's all well intended,
but actually then also has to move
to enable those voice in the planning stage. Thank
You. And just on that grant, that
that level of, um, that level
of governance that you were just talking about is
what we have here, uh, from a governance perspective.
And if you fix the RMA issues that we've just heard there,
then you'll actually, we will start to streamline that.
So don't fix what's not broken.
Uh, there are other things to fix. Yeah.
Grant, just on that, uh, one thing we have,
we have a gravel management strategy and,
and one of the areas, um, that we thought instead
of being at the back end and just, uh, being in the rivers
and talking about the actual gravel in the rivers,
let's go back to the, to the front, the front end.
Create the policies at the top and
therefore just kind of can filter through.
By the time we get to the person taking the gravel out
of the river, it's already, all the
issues have already been sorted.
Yeah. So, I mean, yes, we agree with the,
the way it moving forward, but as long as UA
and regional councils there at the table
Kilda. Thank you. Look,
thank you very much. We have met time.
We appreciate your submission
and highlighting the areas unique to the Canterbury region.
So, uh, appreciate your time today. Thanks
Team.
Thank you. So we will now move on
to our next submitter, the Hamilton City Council,
who are also, uh, joining us via Zoom this morning.
We'll just bring them through.
Same sail, might have some
smoke of the future.
There we go. We can see the popped up.
We just can't see the video.
I think we're having some different, the camera. Sorry.
There we go. You just might want
to pop your camera on there.
We, um, can hear you just
can't see you at this point.
Just having a few we technical issues there,
See of the future.
Come on.
Hamilton City Council, who can I trying to work out how
to turn the camera on there.
Sorry. Sorry. It's a technical issue.
Um, we may have to do it without a camera.
Okay. Um, just for the essence of time. Mm-hmm.
We'll see, see how you go. We, we will hand it over to you.
You've got, uh, 20 minutes with us, so, um, yeah,
we, we'll hand it over to you to start.
Uh, although you cannot see me,
hopefully you can hear me nice and clearly.
My name is Maria Huta
and I am a counselor here at Hamilton City Council
and chair of the Growth and Economic Development Committee.
I'm speaking today on behalf of the elected council
joining me who also cannot see, uh, Dr.
Juliana Ho, our unit director for Urban
and Spatial Planning, and Hannah Wendell, our unit director
of strategic Planning and Advocacy.
They are here to provide senior technical
and strategic support
and to assist with questions from the committee.
Hamilton City Council supports the intent
of both the planning bill and the natural environment bill.
We support a clearer
or top-down planning system, stronger national direction,
and a framework that enables housing infrastructure
and economic development while safeguarding
environmental outcomes.
We are not here to oppose reform.
We are here to help ensure the system works well
and practice, particularly
for fast growing cities like Hamilton.
And that is legitimate, durable,
and trusted, not just efficient.
Hamilton is one of the fastest growing
cities in New Zealand.
And yes, the city of the future, although you
Only, we can't see you
Because that's how futuristic we are.
Um, growth is happening. I just wanna let you know
that growth is happening now at scale
and often at the city's edges
where pressures on infrastructure, funding
and governance are most acute.
Our council's direction set out in the MES plan
is to grow with balance.
That means supporting existing communities,
enabling new housing and economic development,
and protecting the natural
and cultural environment that makes our city livable.
That balance is exactly
what these bills are trying to achieve.
Our submission focuses on a small number of areas
where minor but important legislative changes could
significantly improve certainty, fairness,
and long-term outcomes.
I want to briefly highlight three priority issues,
treaty settlement integrity.
An important issue for us is, or ang
and treaty settlement integrity.
Hamilton operates within the context
of the w Kato River settlement 2010
and ana, which guides how we manage growth, land use,
and environmental effects.
This is not optional for council,
it is the framework we already work within.
Our concern is not that the bills failed
to recognize treaty settlements in principle,
but that the new system may not clearly support councils
to give effect to them in practice, particularly
where obligations are ongoing cumulative
or shared over time.
We are seeking clarity
that the new planning framework supports councils
to continue meeting parliament's existing requirements,
including meaningful participation
and practical implementation mechanisms.
We see w KATO as a useful test case.
If the new system can work well for ana,
it will be strong enough to work
for treaty settlements across the country,
avoiding unintended consequences.
The top down nature of the new system is a strength,
but it also makes getting the foundations right critical.
Reduce local flexibility means ambiguity can shift risk onto
councils or unintentionally override existing obligations.
Our submission seeks targeted amendments not
to change in direction to improve certainty
before the system is locked in.
This includes clearer recognition
or treaty settlement responsibilities, refinements
to compensation and regulatory relief provisions
and clarity around the scope of effects.
So basic safety amenity
and human health outcomes are not unintentionally excluded.
We also seek better alignment
between accelerated development and governance
and funding responsibilities,
including a streamlined boundary adjustment mechanism
where growth crosses council boundaries.
We are also seeking refinements to the compensation
and regulatory relief provisions.
So they do not apply where planning rules simply reflect
inherent land constraints, national direction
or sentiment responsibilities.
Without those exclusions, there is a real risk
of perverse incentives
and unsustainable pressure on councils.
Similarly, we seek clarity around the scope of effects so
that a more permissive system does not unintentionally
exclude basic amenities, safety
and human health outcomes that are fundamental
to well-functioning urban environments.
This is not about aesthetics,
this is about outcomes communities can live with and trust.
Finally, we are seeking targeted changes
to better align accelerated development with governance
and funding responsibilities, particularly
where growth crosses council boundaries.
As mentioned before, a streamlined boundary adjustment
mechanism is small,
but critical change to ensure that growth pays for growth
and costs are allocated fairly taken together.
These are modest changes,
but they are essential
to ensuring the new planning system is practical, practical,
durable, and trusted.
Hey, in closing,
Hamilton City Council supports the direction of reform.
Our submission focuses on suing, on ensuring the new system
upholds treaty settlements
and obligations,
avoids unintended consequences in a top down framework,
delivers certainty, certainty,
and legitimacy, enables growth in a way that's fear,
durable and trusted.
I will now hand over to Dr.
Juliana Hoa,
who will outline the special technical
amendments we are seeking. Over to you.
Morning. So my name is Juliana, sorry
that you cannot see us.
So I'm the unit director
for Urban spatial Planning here at Hamilton City Councils.
So our focus on four key areas
where target amendments could improve the overall
direction of the reform.
So I'll begin with 3D settlement obligations, including
why cattle reverse settlement and certify manner.
So for Hamilton, these are does not abstract principles.
So they are frameworks that actively give effect
in planning decisions every day.
So I think a really practical example
that we have is plan change 12,
which was Hampton City Council response
to the intensification plan change.
Where to 25 month was recognized as a qualified matter
and this enabler intensification while still respecting
settlement commitments.
So I think this is was important
because why Cattle river settlement sets in doing
objectives for the river.
That must be reflected in land use decisions, particularly
where cumulative effects from intensification
can impact the catchment.
So recognizing te manner allowed growth in appropriate
locations while maintaining the integrity of outcomes.
Agree with iwi. Our concerns arise
where settlement responsibilities involve involve cumulative
effects of cross catchments or that,
or mitigation that cannot be fully managed side by side.
So complimenting council Maria points,
we are also seeking clear provisions, AB councils
to collect financial contributions to give effect
to treaty settles, including mitigation
of offsetting were required.
Now turning to the compensation
and regulatory relief framework,
our concern is the financial risks created
for councils if it's applied to broadly, broadly.
So many planning provisions do not impose new limitations.
They only reflect inherent land constraints,
national direct direction or treaty settlement obligations.
So applying a compensation in these circumstances, risk
and sustainable ion councils
and creates perverse incentives not to identify hazards
or protects important values where needed.
So we are seeking target targeted exclusions.
So compensation does not apply where provisions reflect
land reality, national direction
or settle oblig, uh, responsibilities
where impacts arise from national direction
and nationally administrative approach would be more
appropriate than shifting costs to local authorities.
Now I'd like to highlight process, uh, certainty
and timeframes and why key settings should be in the build
rather than led for future regulations.
So several core process steps
and timeframes are proposed to be set through regulations.
We recommend that key timeframes
and procedural settings be established in the
legislation itself.
So communities, applicants councils have certainty from the
outset and the need.
The system avoids disputes about what's
reasonable and what is not.
This is particularly important
where outcomes depend on coordination
between neighboring councils and regional partners.
Cross boundary growth
and infrastructure planning requires sufficient time
to share information that assumptions are we on funding
and servicing ar uh, arrangements?
So Hampton City Council has been facing this
lately on fast track.
So we are just using our current knowledge
to provide some feedback for the debut.
So if we have overly compressed timeframes,
risk forcing decisions
before coordination has meaningful occurred,
creating avoidable conflict and cost status.
Uh, so our request is simple place key timeframes
and core process settings in the bills
and ensure they are realistic
for general cross boundary coordination
and alignment with national instruments.
This will improve certainty, reduce dispute,
and deliver better outcomes first time.
And finally, on the National Environmental Bill Hampton City
Council support the intent to introduce environment limits
and stronger national direction.
Clear national settings are essential
to provide consistency, protected natural environment
and give councils confidence to plan for growth
and infrastructure over the long term.
However, environmental limits only provide certainty if they
operate a clear minimum parameters rather than
negotiable, targeted.
So if limits can be set below national minimums
or variety, there is a real risk of inconsistent outcomes
and increasing pressures on councils
to trade off environmental protection
to accommodate development.
This is particularly problematic
for long-term capital intensive spatial planning
and infrastructure decisions.
So we therefore recommend
that they build more clearly established nationally,
set minimal environmental parameters,
and include safeguards on ministerial powers
so those minimals are not unintentionally weakened over
time, especially
where councils already have statutory obligations such
as treated settles.
So in closing, council supports the direction to the reform.
Our submission focus on target practical amendments
that uphold treated, settles,
protect councils from unintended financial risk
is strengthen the effectiveness of spatial planning
and governance across boundaries
and deliver resilient high quality outcomes
for community and the environment.
So now pass to Hannah Window
to bring a final matter to your attention.
Good morning. Uh, thank you for the opportunity to speak.
Uh, we wanted to bring, uh,
to your attention a very practical example, um,
that's impacting Hamilton
and a number of the councils in our area at the moment, um,
around the cross boundary growth.
Um, we're seeking a much more workable pathway
for boundary adjustments.
Um, you'll be aware we have a number of fast track areas
around abutting our current city, um, limits.
Um, fast growing cities like Hamilton,
we strongly support integrated, um,
metropolitan scale spatial planning.
Um, however, the current local government act down
readjustment process, um, as too slow
and inflexible for us
to accommodate this acce accelerated development.
Um, so in practice development occurs just
outside the city boundary while relying on Hamilton's
infrastructure and services.
So this creates a misalignment between who plans,
who pays and who's accountable.
So as an example, we are currently working
with our neighboring councils very collaboratively
to progress some of these boundary changes.
Um, despite having long standing agreements in place, um,
and willing parties, the process
to move the boundary is resource intensive
and time consuming.
Taking a lot of, uh, staff resources at both councils, uh,
does not provide certainty for landowners, uh,
and really, uh, has has the impact
of not allowing fast track to be as fast as it could be.
Um, we are therefore seeking a streamlined boundary
adjustment mechanism within the planning bill framework.
Um, we want this to be supported
by consequential amendments to the other acts.
This would better align governance and funding with growth.
Um, it would help us to support effective spatial planning
across the wider region, uh,
and help us to ensure that growth pays for growth.
Um, so happy to take any questions on any of the
above, uh, submission points.
Brilliant, thank you very much for your submission.
Look, we are going to give the first question
to Ryan Hamilton from Hamilton, your MP Hamilton.
Um, so Ryan, over to you.
Thanks Chair. Kiata team.
Uh, great to hear you, although we can't.
Um, but, um, thank you for your submission.
Look, uh, two standouts for me. In terms of themes.
You've raised a lot of which other, you know, metros are
as well, obviously tu um, as a an as an exemplar
and potentially one to work through,
but the, um, streamlined boundary adjustment mechanism,
I know that's something you've been working on
for a long time, particularly Hannah.
Mm-hmm. Um, I guess why hasn't it,
why hasn't there been any progress
with it when I know you've had those, you know,
cross council boundary conversations?
What's the bottleneck? Is it, is it still legislative?
I would say that for, um,
the one we're experiencing at the moment,
we have very willing parties in the landowners
and both councils.
What we have though is the timeframe that it takes
to actually action a boundary change,
even moving at a fast pace to get through
that legislative process.
Um, it's likely that those fast track consents will be
lodged in advance of that, which then requires us
and the other council to negotiate payment terms
and agreements, um, in advance of that.
So just to make sure that all those costs are covered,
there's this, um, mismatch between the timeframes of say,
fast track consenting
and those, uh, local government commission processes.
Okay. And finally, obviously you're the fastest growing
city, but you're one of the smallest by geography.
So this is a very live issue for you.
Are you aware of any other metros
or, you know, TAs around the country
that are challenged in this way as well
with the cross boundary issue?
Uh, yes, we've been in conversations
with toga city council.
Um, I understand not to the degree
that Hamilton is experiencing this,
but there are similar issues with, um, growth
around territorial boundaries in the Bay of plenty.
Thank you. Thank You. Uh, look, we'll move to Land Farm
Tina Coto, thank you so much for your submission.
Um, I wanted to just firstly ask a question of clarification
around the boundary aspect.
Again, what can you enlighten us about,
like specific examples, particularly
with the fast track developments that you're talking about.
Would you be seeking to like, in most cases,
extend the boundary to provide certainty to those,
say new residential developments?
Are you wanting to double down on the boundary?
Like what, what is actually happening in that interface?
Um, great question.
So I guess if you go back
to the principles in the local government act
for administrative boundary changes, there are about, um,
good governance, logical communities of interest, um,
and services being provided by the most appropriate entity.
Um, where a residential
or industrial, um, development abut an existing city, it is
by, um, proxy a an expansion of that city.
Those residents and businesses will utilize services
and infrastructure from within the city
and see themselves as a suburb of that city.
So it's about aligning those governance, um,
and service provision requirements, um, to reflect that.
So, long answer,
but yes, we would be looking to expand those boundaries
where it is appropriate.
Um, and in our more fulsome submission, you'll see as well
that that's not necessarily just the land
subject to fast track.
Sometimes there are parcels of land around that, um,
that would make up a more logical, um, boundary.
We want to do this in partnership
with our neighboring councils as well,
but with, uh, good planning kind of outcomes.
Thank you. And can I ask another question, chair?
Yeah. One quick question.
Um, I just wanted
to pick up on your comments in the natural environment Bill,
about your concern about ministerial influence
or powers I should say.
And you talk about, uh, you know,
basically maybe the ministerial influence being uneven
and in the, in the wrong areas.
And you use the example of, um,
it actually reducing the minister's ability to set
national bottom lines for ecosystem health.
And you talk about it undermines central government
accountability for environmental outcomes.
We haven't heard, um, too much about this.
What, what do you mean when you talk about accountability
for central government?
'cause often we are hearing, oh, you know, we want these,
um, to be set at a regional level.
What we see is that
even if we have like bottom lines in terms
of national direction,
it's better than having this flexibility to sometimes allow,
uh, having a different, a different limit.
So this may end up creating some uncertainty.
So this is our main concern is
that if you're gonna have some guidelines, they need
to be even, you know,
and so this is why we are seeking
to reduce the ministerial powers.
So this cannot happen on a case by case basis.
Thank you very much.
Look, we are going to have to leave it there.
We've met time. We appreciate your time this morning
and your insight into the fastest growing city,
which we do hear a lot City of the future.
Uh, and we appreciate your submission. So thank you.
Thank you. Brilliant.
We will now welcome through our next submitter, uh, J
Swap Contractors Limited,
who I believe are also joining us online this morning.
So we will just await for them to come through.
There we go. We can see you there.
Dudley, welcome to the, uh, select committee this morning.
You have 20 minutes with us, so we'll hand it over to you
to talk us through your submission.
Hello. Just maybe
before we start, um, you can hear me okay?
Yep. Yes, we can hear you. Yes. Okay. Thank you very much.
Um, uh, so hello, my name is, uh, Dudley Clemons.
Uh, I work for the, uh, js o roof group of companies, um,
and planning and regulatory affairs.
Uh, the company is a, as a fourth generation family owned
and operated company who operate, uh,
10 hard rock commercial qua in the bay.
Plenty. And the, um, so for our operations,
we value our relationships with man and partners
and our wider communities, uh,
and very much c ongoing journey is one with those on.
So, um, so, so let's start with what, what does,
what do quarries do?
I, I'll assume that, um, that we're, we're all new here to,
to what our operations, what our type is.
Um, so, so quarries basically supply rock that is suitable
to and strong enough to build with.
Um, so not all rocks the same
and, uh, not all rock is strong enough to use, meaning
that it will fall to bit.
So we, we are very much in the business of finding rock
that is strong is strength characteristics needed when
you're putting into things like concrete, uh,
roading materials, um, you know, anything that, that,
uh, you'd like to build out?
So, so, uh, for New Zealand, um,
it means that, uh, basically a lot of the government
through NZTA councils, um, they spend a lot
of their budgets on the raw materials that we supply.
And, uh, that's because, um, those are the entities
that build the infrastructure that New Zealand uses.
Uh, so for example, the average house requires on average
about, um, 250 tons.
Uh, a one kilometer, um, stretch
of a two lane highway requires about 14,000 tons.
And an average truckload is about 27 tons per scale.
So, so a lot of material is needed
and it's usually a high volume, low value product.
Um, now with our, with our government being our customer,
um, it is the government that, that pays
and buys these products.
So we are very much conscious of that in this,
in this current environment.
Uh, so why are we involved in this process?
So, so these acts, uh, just like RMA, regulate our activity.
Um, uh, and that is
because for what we do for, to need to get
to the rock outta the gown to produce it, um,
we have potential adverse effects which come along
with it at the same time.
So the purpose of our involvement here, uh,
with these bills ultimately to secure a consent, a secure,
a consenting pathway that works for our business type.
And, uh, and our interest here really is focused on some
very specific
and key aspects of the bills, which could, um,
set in place a barrier for us to operate.
Um, so the goal of submitting here
and pointing these aspects out is
to avoid those unintended consequences
by creating framework which we can operate in a sustainable
manner with our communities.
So where this intersection takes place is firstly
and around environmental limits, right?
So the purpose of those limits broadly is to provide
for a bottom line where communities in the natural
environment, uh, of, of preventing the degradation of
ecological integrity or to protect human health.
And it is the ecological limits in this context,
which is the focus of the submission,
not the human health components.
So in New Zealand, uh, out
of just over about a thousand quarries across the country,
there are probably about a hundred,
which I would argue at a national level are the most
important with functioning of our cities, ports, et cetera.
And if you pick a main center, there will be quarries
to supply those cities.
And so useful in terms of land mass speaking.
Uh, quarries do not take a large footprint relative,
relative to other land users like farming or forestry.
So if you take, uh, any given Google Earth photo
of the countryside, most area naturally be green, um,
whereas, uh, we are the brown areas is,
and generally we have a coverage of less than 1%
of the land mass itself.
So on mass we have a small footprint,
but where our footprint is located, importantly,
we are likely to have a large direct impact.
And why this 'cause we have to work with
and change the surface of the land with all
of its constituent features that are present like streams
and sometimes native vegetation to get to the rock
below ground or to move, fill above it.
So we, our, our position is that we very much have
to work everything else around where this rock is, is, and,
and that's the unfortunate reality of what's required
to supply these materials, to make road skills, et cetera.
So looking at this new framework, ecological limits,
if it supply blanket everywhere
and practice, this may give no room, uh, to us to allow
what we do, uh, which could effectively veto side operation.
And so determining limits under the draft provisions of the,
the national environment bill,
it does set out a future process of which for us,
for our position sitting here and looking at that, uh,
and what anticipating what the end result would be
and whether we could live with that and make
that work is currently unclear.
So we have seen this
before in practice where a freshwater package,
and this was the national policy statement for freshwater
and national environment, uh, statement for, um,
freshwater management prioritized streams
and wetlands above all else.
And this blocked at the time
many existing quarry developments.
So this issue was identified
and the instrument was changed
to provide a consenting pathway for,
but this took, uh, 18 months
and, uh, some time to unwind that
and insert a pathway that, um, that actually worked.
And so in that case, the solution
provided was a consenting pathway,
and it implemented what's called the effects management
hierarchy, which effectively allowed the activity
provided that it was the effect adverse effects were
avoided, remedied, mitigate, offsetted
or compensated in that order.
So those tests were put in place
and effectively allowed our activity whilst
effectively requiring an net gain to the environment
as a result of the activity itself.
And so our involvement here is essentially to try
and avoid that same situation again with these new pieces
of legislation, ensure that that frameworks
for, for purpose upfront.
So in, in other spaces, such as for vegetation, is,
is being specifically advocated for here the ability
to offset and compensate for those impacts.
So, so to be clear, we are seeking an adverse, uh,
a framework where an adverse effect is possible,
but crucially, the ability to address those impacts is,
is undertaken in a meaningful
and holistic way for the broader ecosystem tied to this
limits and cap preventing adverse effects in all spaces may,
may not allow us to do that.
So how to provide for a suitable framework here?
Well, firstly, the most useful option is
to implement a national instrument across all of those, um,
most important a hundred sites that are referred to.
So that'll capture all the largest
and most commercial, um,
importantly commercial sites in one consistent framework.
And what we're proposing is that this is undertaken
by a new national instrument,
which we call the national environment standard for quarry.
And what we've done is, uh, along with the industry is
provided initial draft at the end of my submission.
Uh, and this has been generated as a collaborative effort
by industry to create effectively a standard for all these,
um, top level, um, highly important queries.
So it would provide consistent standards
that operate operators must follow,
but also importantly, uh, it allows for the implementation
of that fixed management hierarchy framework
that are preferred to earlier.
Uh, so by comparison, the role
of significant infrastructure has been reconciled,
has been recognized with a, a new national policy statement
for infrastructure in 2025,
which has extremely similar themes, um, now
that infrastructure supports
community wellbeing and resilience.
But environmental impacts must,
will be managed at the same time,
and we would argue the same for what we do
and add, that infrastructure cannot be built without the,
the raw ingredients that we produce.
So providing for an instrument, a national instrument,
like a national environmental standard for qua,
would allow us to continue supplying materials
for the community and with those, with
that net benefit for the natural environment.
So we see this kind of approach
as a real heavy cake and to outcome.
And a really efficient, useful outcome would be
to have this national environment at standard for quar made
and considered at the same time
as the bill's being heard now.
And so this means the issue can be addressed now
and this certainty can provide at the outset now too.
Alternatively, if working
through a full ES scoring at this point in time is not
possible, then we would suggest a framework could be set in
place similar to that currently drafted under section
86, the infrastructure.
Now this section effectively provides
for a significant infrastructure
to breach environmental limits,
but also provides a consenting pathway
where those effects are addressed.
So similar. So in effect, this, uh,
section could be either repeated for quarium
or by adding quarrying to this pathway
to sit alongside of the structure.
So this suits the supply chain
where infrastructure can be built with appropriate materials
found in economically viable cost.
So a, a recent good example
of this is the new breakwater at a, uh, which is built
to access most advance, where initially
that project was too expensive due to the cost
of those four materials.
Um, now with some new, uh, uh,
accompanying locally sourced materials, the cost reduced
and the project could go ahead.
And that's, um, that's the newest report effectively
that's been built in New Zealand.
So if section 86 were to be looked at,
it could actually be modified further strength into more
detail by the addition of an E-M-H-E-M-H pathway there.
And even linking to the use of adaptive management plans,
which has already anticipated under section 1 0 4 as well.
So in, in conclusion, we want
to orient a manner which creates net benefit to communities
and the environment by ensuring
that a responsible emission pathway exists
for the operations, right?
So the more efficient the plan phase it is,
the more cost savings that can be passed from
the government and the taxpayer.
So we're looking for smart
and efficient ways to achieve these goals,
which is an best interest who are involved.
Thank you for your time. I'm happy to take any questions.
Thank, thank you Dudley for that insight.
Look, we've got a few questions We'll
start with Cameron Luxton. Well
Thank you chair. Um, Dudley,
I mean you've talked about the,
the critical importance of high quality, solid rock for our,
um, development in our country.
Do you think it would be wise to have in a spatial plan,
say, uh, identifying minerals
and aggregates that could be used in the future?
Um, so that, you know, when someone comes to dig it up,
there's not a a whole lot of surprise.
It's, uh, music to my ears, Cameron.
Um, we've, uh, long been advocating for that kind
of forward planning approach as well.
Now there's pros and cons to that,
but, uh, we would hope that within the,
the new planning bill that there would be certain, um,
either zones or overlays that that could come
and anticipate that, uh,
and earth science New Zealand has done a lot of studies
and over the last few years around
where those resources are too relative
to those critical markets as well.
So the supporting data's already there
and we'd hope to see that come through in this, um,
planning build process and we'll certainly be involved, um,
uh, in those future planning
processes to that effect as well.
Thank you. Uh, oh, we've got a s from Grant on that quick,
Quick stop following up on that.
Thanks Dali.
Um, so you say New Zealand are doing some done doing and
or done some work in that space of, uh,
finding out the resource.
Uh, and and does, does that include actually quantifying
how much there isn't that resource?
Um, because, and we are you obviously with the
where is one thing, but it's the quantity so
that when people are putting together a spatial plan,
they're very conscious that well actually no,
you can't say no there
because you've got plenty of you can say no,
there's plenty over there, or vice versa.
Yeah. So there has been, the work
that's been done doesn't go to the granular level
of exact tunnel pubic data,
but there's, there's probably enough data there to do some,
uh, market studies based on saying, you know,
we've got X over here to supply the,
the needs for community over here.
So, so I think there's enough there
to, to answer that question. Thank
You. Thank
you. And then Ryan also had a supplementary
Thanks, just, just to aware, querying obviously appreciate
your submission and, um, make a lot of good points.
Again, emphasizing adaptive management,
but just on quarries in the regulatory takings piece,
I totally get the need
to preserve future rock bed and, and aggregate.
But surely if there's a commercial, um, benefit from it,
then the, the regulatory takings is like for like,
so the quar keep,
you're saying council might prevent zoning,
but surely if they say there's gonna be a cost per then
that would just be embedded, no pun intended in the,
in the acquisition by the quarry.
Like isn't that fear that, uh,
they're not just superimposed over private land like every,
every other, you know,
complaint we have about council redlining
over personal property?
Yeah, look, and that's, that's sort of part of the pro
and con argument around that zoning aspect
and around, uh, what the best approach is.
But during my time, we've certainly seen a lot
of resources sterilized from, from poor planning.
So that's, that's why we're an advocate for better planning
and identifying where those resources are.
And look, if there's a cost that comes with that, um, then,
then to us that's, that's not a, a, a barrier
that it can't be effectively crossed in some way.
Um, the, the barriers are really like
what we're talking about here in this regulatory context
rather than the market side.
So, so, so for me,
these are the more important settings to get right?
Um, the regulatory undertakings, we'll, we'll just deal with
that at a time, whatever that looks like.
Yeah, that, that clarifies. Thank you. Thank
You. And Rachel
Brooking.
Yeah. And usually I was gonna ask a very
similar question to Cameron.
Uh, but so on, on that point of spatial plans, um,
what you're saying is that there is the mapping in existence
of where the rock is,
but what there isn't is the, uh, the planning aspect of
that in terms of, uh, how much rock
and where it would be needed
for growth in a urban area or any area.
It's probably more best described
as like the reconciliation of all the competing interests.
So, so for us, we start
with the number one priority is where's the rock?
And then we have to get all the other ducks lined up
in a row after that, right?
And, um, quite often it's sort of some of the other ducks
that come in a row, which, which effectively reduce access
to or, or kill the access,
if you wanna call it that, to the rock itself.
So there might be, uh, for example, uh, uh,
a significant ecological area which does have happen
to have characteristics which need preserving.
So, so, okay, so you can't access that, that piece of rock.
Well then that goes to one side, we focus on the next side.
So you just simply have to work through the process
to figure out where all those ducks line up in a row
so you can then access that resource.
So, so, so we can only, so the rock's one thing,
but it's all about managing the,
the other competing interests as well to, to make,
make the cake work effectively, make, get the recipe right,
But, but the, the maps of the rocks exist,
Correct? That's right.
Yeah. Earth science
New Zealand, uh, already done.
Thanks. Thank you. Dudley.
Look, I'm gonna just jump in here
'cause it's been really interesting
to hear a submission from a quarrying perspective
because, uh, I suppose I speak, um,
in my electorate in Tookie Tookie,
we have quite a lot of quarries as well.
We are just undertaking a big four lane expressway at the
moment, um, which is the first road
of national significance to start.
And obviously that needs a lot of aggregate
and a lot of product from the quarries.
So, um, and there have been challenges around consents
and obviously, um, being able
to get access to that aggregate.
Um, you know, what is the cost of consenting
and the time it's taking under the current, uh,
system at the moment.
Do, do you feel obviously having, you know,
10 queries in your area?
I I think the, the best
and most relatable, um, example with data is, is the work,
the infrastructure, infrastructure commission's done just
around the cost of consenting you, you would've seen
that come through before in the past.
And our situation is very much similar to that So,
so our industry hasn't gone to that granular level of detail
and study that the infrastructure Commission has done,
but, um, but our experience is the same.
So, so that's why we look at those numbers
and we go, oh, they're probably about right in terms
of a ballpark for
Us. Because I suppose what
we are finding is that the closer
that you can have the quarries to the, uh, the road,
obviously the more cost efficient that's going to be, uh,
for everyone, obviously.
So the, the first 30 kilometers that load of metal,
metal travels that doubles basically.
Mm-hmm. And so it's, it's slightly reducing after that,
but basically every 30 kilometers
that the cost just goes up and up and up.
So, and that, that's where the project killer comes in, is,
is, is projects relative to
where the source of the material is?
How close are they? So,
Mm, no, um, absolutely.
Hey, thank you very much Dudley for your submission today.
Uh, we appreciate your time, um,
and giving us a perspective from the quarrying sector.
Really appreciate it. Thank
You very much. Have a good day. Thank you.
Thank you. Right.
We will now move on to our next submission, uh,
which is from the Bay of Plenty Regional Council, which
I understand is joining us online.
There we go. We can see you, uh, we can see you all.
Welcome to the select committee this morning.
Uh, you have 20 minutes with us, so take your submission
as read, but we'll hand it over to you to, to open up,
Uh, ki thank you chair.
Uh, we, and thank you for the committee.
Thank you opportunity to present
to the select committee on our submissions to the planning
and, uh, natural environment bills.
Um, my name is Glen Dougle.
I am the Deputy Chair of Bay Regional Council,
and I'm supported by, uh, councilor Ka McMillan.
She is our chair of strategy and policy, and also councilor.
Uh, we also have in the room staff Steven Lan, ADE Hatfield,
and our tenant who will answer any technical questions.
So simply, the Bay PT Regional Council supports the need
for reform and enduring legislation.
Uh, we understand the government's proposal,
proposed resource management framework,
and what the draft legislation is designed to achieve
for this legislation to be successfully delivered.
To give the outcomes, there needs to be policy longevity,
um, and without balance, this will not be achieved.
Um, so on this basis,
we are strongly recommending including the idea
of sustainable management, uh, in the goals themselves.
Um, and we have some thoughts
how Maori interests should be included.
Councilman Mill,
Koto, Anor. Um,
I'll just touch on a few key points
that were raised in our submission.
So the first one is regional spatial planning.
Um, and we totally support having one regional spatial
plan for the Bay of Plenty.
We are good to go here in the Bay of Plenty.
In terms of the region that we are, um, defined,
we have three sub-regional spatial plans already developed.
Um, and everybody is aligned, aligned and good to go.
So we are seeking mechanisms
that acknowledge the spatial planning work
that we've already done, um,
and has already been consulted on and agreed to.
We also are seeking recommendations of timeframes
and deliver deliverables
to ensure the building blocks like natural direction, uh,
sorry, national direction
and environmental limits are in place prior
to finalizing even the first generation of
regional spatial plans.
So even though we are pretty advanced as a region, um,
we need, we, we do need these timeframes aligned so
that we can consult and get everything, um, appropriate
for the, for the delivery.
Spatial planning, as we all know,
is inherently strategic and play space.
Not everything that matters
to our communities will fit neatly into a goal
or an environmental limit.
A good example for us is rot, where geothermal surface
features and vegetation are important, tourism assets
and culturally significant,
but are not outstanding natural features or landscape.
Um, so clause 14 as drafted Clause 14 prevents consideration
of a number of specific matters including visual, amenity,
odor, and any effects on landscapes
and views from properties.
Um, unless an area is an outstanding net natural area,
our concern is that even if communities identify important
or sensitive areas, this won't flow down
and have any influence through the combined plan
or consenting decisions.
So we are actually seeking an amendment clause 14,
to allow consideration of effects communities
identify as important.
This change lets regions respond to matters significant
to local communities without creating
unnecessary complexity.
The next point I'll touch on is Li is limits.
So limits will be a critical aspect of the future system,
but the scope of limits
and how they must be implemented is uncertain,
and it doesn't appear that the drafting will deliver
what central government is looking for.
A key matter is that the definition
of a limit doesn't appear to allow communities
to set balance limits that are designed to deliver
for all stakeholders.
And broadening out of the definition of a limit
will be important to address
Maori interests across the bills.
There are limitations on input from Maori.
I know you've had a lot of submissions on this,
which is a particular issue for the Bay.
Plenty. Given our treaty landscape.
This topic falls into, um,
as our deputy chair touched on the balance topic identified
on this topic, we do not think the balance is right
and we would recommend
that the select committee consider this
matter very carefully.
This is one specific area
that could undermine policy longevity,
um, an extension of time for resource consents.
We implore you to consider the purpose
of a consent duration extension,
and a more nuanced position on extension.
As outlined in our submission, a blanket extension applying
to all consents would result in some, um,
negative negative impacts.
For example, uh, one, uh, one example here is
with our Mark Nui air shed.
So continued adverse impacts on human health
from air discharge could occur with blanket consenting.
So we are opposing a blanket extension of all consents
and it will have many negative impacts.
Um, so on that note, happy to take any questions. Thank you.
Thank you very much. I actually might just jump in there.
Um, on that last point that you made,
because it has come up a few times, um,
opposing the extension to consents,
and you've just given an example, um,
I was just a little confused around that.
Could you just elaborate a little bit further on the,
the practicalities of that?
So with the blanket extension for all?
Yes. Yeah, yeah. So some, some things make sense.
Um, what's an example of a, of a sort of, yeah,
So, so there's some, I'll hand to
Ella, some things make sense to do that,
other things don't, and it's nuanced.
So if we just go blanket across,
then there's gonna be negative impacts on some things,
which, for example, the Mount Mon Mon Airshed,
the consenting has a sinking lid.
So when people reapply,
the consent might have stricter rules
to get those air quality gains, but all hand to elaborate.
Yeah. So in terms that nu you shared example, there has,
um, recently been a consent granted for that prior
to the reforms being announced, which was, um,
very much intended as a short term consent
because the applicant was, um, required
to get in place a bit of an upgrade proposal.
Now, with that being extended, it means
that the air discharge is going to affect human health
and that national environmental standard compliance
for longer because of
that consent being extended rather than it coming up
for reassessment, um, which was something that was discussed
and agreed with the applicant,
they proposed shorter term consent to allow for that.
Um, and there is often where you've got, um, air quality
or water quality issues when you have replacement consent,
there's often a bit of a, um, incremental
improvement from each consent to, to create, uh,
something better going forward.
So extending all of those can mean
that those adverse effects affect that area for longer, um,
because they're not being reassessed.
There's a number of consents too that are granted
for short durations
because they are only short duration consent.
So if you've got earthworks consent, you don't need
a 20 year duration or a 10 year duration
because your earth work's gonna be finished
within a short term.
And so it just creates an administrative burden
for the consent holder themselves,
because then they are potentially charged fees.
Um, they're wanting to surrender their consent, all of that,
um, nuisance really for something
that doesn't give them any benefits.
Um,
Just, yeah. So there
will definitely be costs.
Yes. Um, because Canterbury gave a example earlier
of having 6,000 consents with 1500 expiring.
What, what kind of numbers do you have
there in the, and the above
8,000?
Oh, uh, similar about, um, nine, 9,000.
Okay. Okay. Thank you.
Uh, look, we'll move to Lan Farm who has a question.
Thank you so much for your submission.
Um, apologies if I've missed this in your submission.
Um, but Canterbury Regional Council,
and we didn't get to talking about it,
but they raised in their submission, their concern around,
um, basically the fact that councils,
especially regional councils, won't be able to use
regulatory tools in your planning
unless you basically have satisfied
and you've done an assessment that non-regulatory measures
won't achieve the goals that you are seeking
to seek out to achieve.
Um, they wanted to delete that aspect
and thought it was too high a bar
of council source to have to meet.
Do you have any, uh, thoughts about what that would mean
for Bay of Plenty?
Um, I think we end up with the same concerns.
The question is to, to what extent and what scale?
So we could argue
that 6 32 already goes through that process.
Um, we are looking at, you know, you always ask
to look at alternative options.
So, and this is again, um, these are new bills
and new interpretations,
and we look at this perhaps
with a worst case scenario in mine
because we dunno how these play out.
Uh, but the bills tend to be saying, you do an awful lot
of work to work out whether a rule is the best place to go.
So again, it could be akin to a section 32
or could be akin to a very, um, increased workload for,
you know, councils in a recovery sense.
So we're not sure. Um, so that's, so our concern is more
of a question mark, should we say.
Thank you. Uh, Cameron Luxton has the next question.
Thank you, chair. Um, KDA neighbors.
Um, my question's about the recent, uh,
or you, you've been going through the process of, um,
doing your water, uh, policies, um, my questions about
how you see your water quality plans taking into account
economics and whether you think farming's got a,
a big enough part of a say in the way this this
plan has been developed
And, and the way the the new
plans will be developed and the,
And the way you've been working, the how,
because you are currently going through the process,
I understand of, um, consulting
and getting feedback on your plans, have you,
on your fresh water management plans? Yes. Uh,
Have you, so, um, how
Do you think farming and economic values been taken
into account in that process?
I, I, I'd say quite well, uh,
we do have a specific farming group,
well, let me preface that.
Say we did have, um, until we hit the plan stop.
So we were working with farming groups, um,
part connected catchment groups
where they exist in the re in the region to look at
what is the impact that these things being proposed.
So we were testing ideas
for the farming sector rather than saying,
this is what's proposed.
Um, all the pre Florida management units were looking at
the, the value based and obviously economics
or the, it's more the primary sector,
the productive sector is always part
of those value based discussions.
So yes, clearly part of it. Yes.
So just so, uh, just stop on that, Jeff.
So, um, including farming management group economic groups
in your consultation is how you've done it,
but what are they being measured against?
So, you know, if, if a freshwater management, um,
was it unit sort of, what, what's their, what's the prompt
to make sure that it's being taken into account other than
just, um, you know, going to events and talking to people
and having pharma groups as part of the consultation?
Like what's the measurement in your value set
that you're putting forward when
you're developing this plan?
Yeah, so, so each, each fresh forward management area, um,
generally large catchments,
but they have sub cash within them.
The, the question is what
are the values within these catchments?
Uh, always primary production is, is one of those values.
So farming, but also forestry, so, so,
you know, horticulture, the whole range of them.
So that then becomes a start point for any discussion about,
so what do we look to achieve in each catchment?
So yes, it's, it's, it's important in that way.
I don't think we sort of, we do test the actual metrics
that economic metrics through like straight analysis,
but that's a secondary part.
We start with the fact that we've talked
to the sector about, so, so what are,
what's everyone doing here and why are we doing
Okay? Thank you.
And Ana has a question.
Um, I just wanna reflect,
because we've heard from other regional councils around,
uh, the longstanding relationship with Iwi,
um, and know that often,
and we've heard also around, you know, the difficulty
that in consent, you, you're just inundated
as HOA responding to consent.
But if we looked at the system and setting, um, plans
and policies together at the, um, at the outset together as,
um, as partners, uh, we could really look to, um,
set up, uh, a regional plan, uh, a way of working, um,
that could benefit both iwi, Maori
and council and community.
Can you give us a bit of feedback in terms of
that longstanding relationship that you've had with ua, uh,
and the way that you think that there's opportunities for us
to improve, but also bed down
and learn from what you have done, uh, locally
and as we've heard from other councils and, um,
and upholding, um, those te relationships.
I'll just stop Han very quickly to Steven.
So, um, we are pretty unique here in that we've had, uh,
Maori ward counselors for 22 plus years,
and over that time have had incredible, uh, engagement
and partnerships with Maori.
We've got obviously a number of, uh,
co-governance treaty settlement, uh, forums and entities,
and we have some pre, we have pre-settlement ones as well.
And then we have some co-governance,
co-governance management governance forums as well
that are not non statutory.
Um, so that's kind of the opening of the landscape
of the Bay of Plenge for, uh, the relationship with, uh,
to regional council.
But I'll hand to Steven for the technical.
Um, just to add on to what KA just said, um,
we also have a committee, Maori, that sits in our council
that actually helps support our iwi partnerships
that we have in council.
And that's been going for the long length of time
of 22 years, and I'm fortunate to be the chair of
that particular pu.
And when the select committee from Parliament came, yes,
last week, this was one of the greatest things
that we spoke about was exactly this.
It was around how we engage with our iwi,
and we didn't need to tell them anything,
but Iwi told them that their relationship with us was
so good that when they arrived to us
and had a huge impact on what we said and what we did.
And so our iwi reference into this is quite tight,
hence the reason you will hear so many of our people here,
not only from, but throughout the whole,
there are a unique system put together
that we are engaged with.
Um, ki it's, it's, it's a very wide question,
so I'm not sure I can do it justice in, in the time we have,
um, we have, um, strong relationships with, uh, iwi
and Hapu, um, land trusts, we have co-governance forums,
we fund iwi management plans, um,
we have relationship managers with Iwi.
We, um, have numerous ways of connecting and engaging.
We, we always have this thing where we say, we,
we never get to consultation.
We'll always way past that in
engagement and relationship building.
Um, the, the question about how we can do it better, um,
whilst we support the front loading idea,
which we've heard a lot of, um,
because that builds more into the front end of plans
and, and is helpful there.
The, the question or issue we have perhaps is around
how it flows down to the system.
So it's not when you get
to the understanding the exact nature of an activity
that down at a consent level that you know what the,
where the risk of loss actually is in a cultural sense.
So to exclude mari interest from, you know, the bottom
of the funnel, um, that's where we have a concern
and that's where, um,
the deputy chair may comment about the balance.
You know, how that's an area of, we,
we've got some question marks around, so be done
at the front loading whilst retaining what's good.
Look, thank you very much for your submission today.
Um, there's certainly a few common themes coming
through from the regional councils across the country, so,
um, appreciate the time
that you've put into this submission.
Um, and thank you for being with us today. So thank you.
Just one thing, we've got a couple of minutes left.
Can I just bring out a couple more key points,
touch on a couple more key points,
or are you running too late?
Yeah, we are just, we are start, we are running,
we are running behind time,
but we do have your written submission,
so we appreciate the time that you've put into that.
Um, and obviously members have the
opportunity to ask questions.
So, uh, appreciate your time.
Thank you. Look, uh,
moving on to our next submission today, uh,
is the Port of Auckland, who we have here with us,
um, in the room today.
So welcome, welcome to the select committee.
You have, thank you, 20 minutes with us.
And I know you've been waiting and watching some
of the submissions coming through, so we'll hand it over
to you for your opening remarks,
but of course, uh, take your submission as read
and members will have questions.
Cool. Look, thank you. Um, my name is Alistair Kirk.
I'm the general manager of Infrastructure
for the Port of Auckland.
And I'm Julie Wagner.
I look after communications,
government relations, and our community
Work. So,
look, I've been, um, involved in a wide range
of consenting for the port.
Um, and, and that the planning processes, um, basically
to ensure that the port can operate efficiently
and provide the critical infrastructure that we need.
Um, we hold over 30 resource consents for kind
of the operation and the development of, of the port.
And we also operate under some quite bespoke provisions
within new Auckland unitary plan.
So we kind of, uh, sort of a heavy user of the,
of the RMA, so to say.
Um, those, those consents
and those provisions, they cover the operation of the port,
so how much, how much noise we can create, lighting levels
and all that expansion of the port.
Um, and there's, there's a lot of complexity
that sits in there as we kind
of bridge both the water and the land.
The port operates 24 7, uh, seven days a week
to ensure an efficient supply chain, um,
and it provides clear public benefits.
And we also, for example, um,
support the tourism sector through cruise.
Um, we're also a member of the Port CO group, um,
and we're, um, part of their submission too, um,
which we support on, on these two bills as well, so
that we're supportive of the, um,
of the new planning, um, system.
And basically the government's focus on promoting, um,
efficiency in a yes culture.
Um, we support the core objectives, um,
and the, the intentions
to reduce cost complexity and litigation.
We've identified, um, some discrete drafting
and mechanical issues kind of within our submission, um,
aimed at creating, um, sort of greater certainty
and strengthening those provisions that relate
to, to infrastructure.
We're also really encouraged by the recognition
of infrastructure through
specific national planning, um, goals.
And our submission kind of focuses on, um, the fact
that actually some infrastructure like ports
actually is really limited in, in terms of flexibilities to
where it can be located and how it, how it operates.
So a port must be on the coast, must have deep water access,
must be in a sheltered location, um,
must have a sizable area of flat land, must have good road
and rail connection,
and importantly must be close to kind of warehouses
and distribution centers and that.
So you've got very kind of limited scope there in, in terms
of where you can be located, how you function.
And I think too, it's, it's right for ports to be defined
as long lived infrastructure.
You know, we've got, we've got some wolves
that are a hundred years old,
they'll probably still be there in
another a hundred years time.
So, um, kind of by my definition, that's kind
of long lived, really.
Um, why is reform needed?
Um, I'm just gonna give you an example of, of,
of some consents,
but we are upgrading our infrastructure to cater for growth,
and we've got two types of growth.
We've got growth in the freight task.
So that's, that's largely due
to Auckland's increasing population.
And we've got growth due to, um,
our customers deploying larger ships.
So our customers operate in global supply chains,
and they are basically, um, as, as new build ships are built
around the world, they're cascading the,
the older ships down through the system
and we end up in an Australasia, um,
and New Zealand needing to handle bigger and bigger ships.
And, and that also plays into the fact
that the freight task is increasing.
So those bigger ships, they've got deeper draft, they,
they need stronger wolves, they need longer wolves and that,
and, uh, we've got major projects underway to cater
for larger container ships and larger cruise ships.
And that includes, uh, dredging
or what we call capital deepening of our access channel,
building a new wolf, extending another wolf, uh,
new cruise terminal, and lots of other projects like, um,
um, increasing the resilience, um,
of our electrical system, et cetera.
So, um, our consent to deepen the shipping channel
that was obtained under the current RMA settings,
that consent took almost four years,
and we had three court cases running on that consent.
Um, uh, people who were opposed to it,
um, were appealing it.
And at the end of the day, you know, that consent was kind
of mission critical for us,
and those, those court cases were,
were over relatively minor matters.
So, you know, almost four years, a lot of cost,
incredibly complex and inefficient,
and it just gave our customers no certainty
around deployment of larger ships
and timing and stuff like that.
Um, on the other hand,
we were granted the first RMA fast traction scene late last
year, um, for the new BLE slow North wharf
and the new Ferguson North wharf,
that consent took 111 days.
Um, and as we speak right now,
construction is racing ahead and as well underway.
So really importantly, that's actually providing our crews
and our container line customers
with certainty and confidence.
So rather than operating in that gray area
of never quite knowing timelines
and how long things would take, we're now able
to give our international customers a lot more certainty
and a lot more confidence.
And from our perspective, huge reduction in the cost
of obtaining the consent.
Um, and, and means Julie
and I are not totally distracted on dealing
with all these other things,
and we can focus on our, on our day jobs, really.
Um, so look, we support the proposed consenting provisions,
um, and the desire to, um, enable more efficient,
more cost-effective, effective consenting, um,
and also the limitations to the scope of effects
to be considered, um, the requirements for information to be
provided with an application that's kind of proportionate
to the scale, um, and significance of the consent.
Um, and I think in terms of
duration of consent, um,
whilst the port supports the inclusion
of a minimum consent term for long lived infrastructure, um,
we seek that that term is extended from 35 to 50 years.
Now that's, that's largely
because infrastructure's actually designed
and constructed more for, for an intended life
for more than 50 years.
Um, you know, our new wharf is, is designed
for a hundred year design life.
Uh, deepening of the channel is basically done
to essentially last forever.
And, um, as an example, maintenance dredging, which is
to deal with the regular buildup of sediment.
Um, you know, that that is an ongoing thing
for the foreseeable future.
Um, we do maintenance stretching every two years.
In the longest duration we've been able to get, um,
a consent form for maintenance stretching is 20 years.
Mm-hmm. And it's about to expire very shortly.
It's mission critical for us,
and we've got to go through the uncertainty
and the cost of reapplying.
Um, a again, um,
and I just wanna comment a wee bit on standardization
of plan provisions.
Um, as a poor, we operate 24 7, we,
we work day and night to turn the ships around, um,
and get them out quickly.
And we have a pretty efficient supply chain
where cargo moves on
and off the port, um, all hours of the day and night.
And it's really important to us that adjacent developments
or activities do not constrain the court.
Um, and that we are protected from incompatible land use.
And whilst we increase, um, we support, um, standardization
of plan provisions, um, as proposed within the bill,
we're kind of concerned
that it may actually result in the dilution
of the bespoke port provisions
that we have in the Auckland unitary plan.
So, as an example, in the unitary plan, there are provisions
or rules that we must comply with beyond our boundary.
We can't internalize all the effects.
We, um, we need to com we comply with provisions
around noise levels, around how much light spill we have
around air quality, et cetera.
And there is also reciprocal rules that apply
to new residential developments, um, within
the zone around the port.
So their facades, for example, must be designed
to attenuate the noise that we create within those levels
that are specified for us,
and that enables us to operate 24 7 with kind
of minimal adverse effects on the community.
I think it strikes a good balance between the port
and the community, and our submission seeks
to retain that flexibility for councils
to have bespoke provisions there
where it's required within the local context.
Um, you know, we, I think all ports are slightly unique,
slightly different in terms of the location and, and the,
and the issues that are there.
So that we're supportive of the reform
and the intent behind the, the bills.
Um, we've identified some discreet drafting
and mechanical things in our submission.
And, um, very happy to take questions, um, from yourself.
Look, thank you. Sorry, I'm not feeling well.
I'm just gonna pop up to the Okay, no problem.
That's, um, thank you very much for that submission.
Uh, lots to take on board there.
Uh, grant McCollum has the first question. Yeah.
I'm just curious. The, um, uh, took you four years
to get some recent consents, um,
and over relatively minor matters with the objection.
Just curious, because what those sort of minor matters were,
um, because I'm designing a system, if,
if it matters are minor, why would they then lead
to objection, I suppose is the point I'm getting
To? Yeah. So I
think it'd be fair to say that the bar,
the bar is set very, very low Yeah.
In terms of being able to take an appeal or, or that,
and these related to, uh, environmental matters
and some cultural matters.
Mm-hmm. And, um, it was,
it was very easy for, um, groups or trusts to form
and just lodge an appeal
and from people who I think at the end
of the day didn't want the port
there or something like that.
Yeah. But to then use some of these matters as, as a reason,
as a reason to actually try and knock that consent over and,
and frustrate the port in that.
And, and, and it sort of leads on to the,
you've highlighted around your dr your classic Yeah.
Whereas your infrastructure spot, I don't know what,
what's your current consent for the whole, what, 35 years?
Yeah, so it's 30, it's, it's 35 years. Yeah.
And so you, you'd have thought
that actually your long term consent
for the actual infrastructure line up,
all the other key consents,
otherwise any one
of those could trip you over at any one
time. I would've thought that would
Yeah, that's right. And
you, you know, you've just got, uh, on, on one hand,
you just have to kind of almost ignore those,
those those deadlines
and going, actually we're investing here for the long term,
even though we can only get a 20 year
or a 35 year consent for something.
Um, but we are, you know, we are building infrastructure
that's quite often got a 50 to a hundred year life.
Mm-hmm. One of the arguments
or the, some people make who, who think
that don't necessarily agree
with really long term consents is if things change,
how do we know your, you know, you,
things are performing well
and there's no sort of long term damage we can't address
until the end of the consent.
What would be your response to that?
Um, I think irrespective
of whether the consent is 35 years, 50 years,
or let's say a hundred years, yeah.
I think that those effects are probably gonna be the same
anyway, irrespective of that duration.
Mm-hmm. Um,
and in our particular case, we do a lot of monitoring.
We are in a heavily built up environment. Yeah.
We're not in a, we're not in a pristine greenfield site,
so we do a lot of monitoring.
The effects are pretty well understood. Yeah.
Um, and, and, and,
and things, um, generally, uh, play out
as per what's kind of modeled or predicted
or that, so there hasn't, we haven't had the situation
where things have been way out of whack or, or,
or that in terms of what's been predicted.
This is what's happened. Okay.
Thank you. Look, I've got a few questions 'cause um, yeah.
Ports are obviously really important infrastructure
for us being able to double the value of our exports.
Yeah. Um, over the next 10 years play a pivotal role.
We've got Nike Port and my electorate as well.
And, um, you know, we can see the benefit
of those new wharfs being able
to attract more ships, et cetera.
Um, you know, you say the Zo Wharf was 111 days, um,
that, like how many jobs
and what kind of economic impact does that have?
Yeah, look, I haven't got those exact numbers in front
of me, but, um, you know, we've got a couple
of hundred people on site building it at the moment.
Um, you know, that's, that's just over a year of,
of construction.
Mm-hmm. Um, and the economic impact for the,
for the cruise industry, um, which, which
that impact actually felt throughout New Zealand
is, is it's huge.
And there's various reports out there, you know, it's, it's,
it's, it's getting up towards a billion dollars in terms of
those type of economic impacts.
Um, and in our particular case, what
that wolf does too is actually enables us
to free up some other land for Auckland Council then
to develop public use as well.
So there's a whole range of impacts that sit in there.
Um, not just for, for, for jobs and the wider economy,
but also actually freeing up some other, um, assets.
Mm. Um, for alternate use as well. Because
You talk about the cruise ships
and obviously you've got about 117 cruise ships.
Yep. Um, and you know, obviously the cruise ship industry,
um, we're seeing a few less ships perhaps coming into
New Zealand at the moment, but obviously
with better infrastructure
and faster consenting processes, would that enable us
to attract more of those cruise ships,
which obviously ultimately would have a really good benefit
flow on effect to the economy? Yeah,
Absolutely. I mean, we are
a key, we're a key anchor port, um,
or turnaround port for those ships
because of the hotel stock and the international airport.
And, um, it's been rather fraught in Auckland
around extending the infrastructure for the cruise ships.
Um, I know that we are referred to in Miami as New Zealand.
Um, yeah, that's right. And,
and, you know, to actually land a consent quickly
and show that we kind of mean business
and we are investing in cruise now, what we're seeing a bit
of a decline at the moment that is,
that is based on decisions
that were made in Miami three years ago based on the current
climate and, you know, us building the wolf now, well,
you know, it will be another two or three years
before we see that flow on effect with,
with additional cruise ships,
but it's sending all the right signals, um, that we is,
is a country we're kind of open for business.
Yeah. Um, look,
I've see Rachel Brooking has got her hand up online there.
Thank you. Thank you. Yeah.
Really a supplementary to the tiers question earlier about,
um, the port and the economic,
uh, benefits of having the port.
And just on that, wondering if you think there, um,
because she was referring to all of our exports, if, uh,
there's, if there should be some distinction between ports
that are mainly used for exports, uh, versus imports?
No, I don't, I don't think there,
there should be any separation in there.
I mean, yes, we've got the Auckland population
and we largely import for the Auckland population,
but ports kind of operate as a network.
So, um, ships come into Auckland with their containers full,
um, they get unloaded, the containers get de vanned
or emptied, and then those containers go down country
to be filled, filled with exports.
So if you, if you didn't have that balance, um,
you'd still be bringing, you'd still, you'd have
to then be bringing empty containers to New Zealand
to be filled with exports, for example.
So having that balance, having, um, you know,
applying the same, same regime to all ports, I think is the,
is the right answer there.
Thank you. And Grant has got a supplementary on that. Just
Going back to the, you going back, we talked about the,
um, the consent and,
and relat minor matters in terms of, obviously if, you know,
people can, you know, put up through a process can object
and so forth, you think there's more scope for people if, if
around really minor objections in terms of their,
the awarding of costs
and so forth like that just
to make people really think about whether it's actually
something that needs to be objected to?
Yeah, I mean we've had, you know, I've,
I think I've been frustrated in the past
where it's been pretty easy for a, for a group
to establish a trust or something and object.
And then, um, we have a win against them
and pursue them for costs
and they wind up trust very quickly and disappear.
So, um, sure. Yeah.
I mean I personally, I think the
bar should be set a lot higher.
I think also though, you know, in, in terms of that output,
our fast track consent, um,
we certainly didn't skim in terms
of the stakeholder engagement.
I think we engaged with 140 odd parties.
We had good quality technical reports.
I think applicants, you know, it's not a shortcut.
I think applicants still need to do a thorough job Yep.
As a shortcut. Um, but it, from, from there on,
it should be streamlined.
And I think the bar to kind of oppose things or,
or that should be set a lot, a lot higher. Thank you.
Look, thank you very much for your submission today.
Uh, yeah. Really interesting consideration.
So I appreciate your time
and for being here as well. Thank you.
Cool. Thank you. Thank you very much.
So we now move on to our next submission, uh,
business New Zealand, uh, who is also here
with us in person today.
Welcome to the select committee this morning.
Uh, please do take your submission as read,
but we'll hand it over to you, uh,
for your opening remarks. Sure.
Thank you Chair and members of the committee.
I'm John Pass, chief Economist of Business New Zealand.
It is widely accepted
that the current resource management system is broken
and requires fundamental reform.
We can't continue to say no
to infrastructure development needed to support housing,
energy, transport, and telecommunications.
Were broadly supportive of the two bills
and the more balanced approach they introduced
to resource management
and consider if they're implemented well,
they could be transformational for New Zealand's economy.
And some of those stats are outlined in our submission
and background reports on the bill.
I guess in terms of key features, we strongly support
include greater recognition of property rights
and narrow scope for regulating effects, standardized zones
and rules, and a higher threshold for objections, which
to emphasize the importance of trying
to achieve cross party support for these reforms.
Um, you know, frequent policy reversals undermine confidence
and investment and if it takes a bit longer, um, to,
to panel beat these bills, is that we're, I think
that would be in a desirable objective.
While we support the general directional reform,
there are areas of further work that need, um, panel budget
as it were, and they're outlined in our submission today.
For the sake of time, I'll focus on just three key issues.
First one is goals and trade-offs.
Secondly, property rights
and compensation for regulatory takings.
And thirdly, future resource allocation frameworks
dealing with the goals and trade-offs.
The planning bill requires regional spatial plans
to address many objectives, including development, capacity,
infrastructure, climate adaptation,
and environmental protection.
Environ, but without clear prioritization,
this risks uncertainty and inconsistent decision making.
And if we go to the goal language and, and,
and the planning bill clause 11, it has terms such as
unreasonably affect others in inappropriate development
that they're not defined.
Um, and when undefined concepts that at the top
of the statutory hierarchy, they're gonna tend to lead
to increased litigations, greater uncertainty,
and encourage risk averse decision making
and experience under the Resource Management Act
that suggests this type of draft
and can expand delays rather than reduce them.
And we've gotta accept it's inevitable.
There's gonna be economic development
and environmental protections will sometimes conflict.
And we need to have clear trade-offs
that are addressed transparently
and supported by robust cost benefit analysis.
Turning to the environmental natural environment Bill, one
of the goals and clause 11, there is no net loss
for indigenous biodiversity.
And while business New Zealand is strong supportive of,
of protecting biodiversity, the bill doesn't clarify
how not net no net loss is gonna be measured over
what timeframe or what geographical scale.
And in practice, this could create significant uncertainty
for development and costly and contentious processes.
So our key recommendation there is we need
to provide clearer statutory guidance on
how competing objectives are gonna be prioritized.
And recogniz, um, reconcili
greater reliance on clear rules
and standards are preferable than broad
evaluative judgements.
Turning to the second issue of property rights
and compensation for regulatory takings,
it goes without saying that property rights are fundamental
to a market economy and we welcome the intention
and the reforms to strengthen
recognition of property rights.
However, the proposed regulatory relief framework lacks
clarity and detail, um, one
of the clear justifications for the reforms
that councils would actually need
to clearly confront the cost Sam impose
on landowners and others.
But at present, the legislation doesn't clearly
achieve this in our view.
For example, the planning bill provides regulatory relief
mechanism and rules significantly impact on
reasonable use of land.
But under the natural environment, bill access
to relief appears to be much more limited.
For example, relief appears to be restricted
to indigenous biodiversity, significant natural areas
or sites of significant to Maori.
This does raise issues about consistency across the system
and in our view
of councils are gonna impose restrictions in the public
interest, the cost should be transparently recognized,
not compensating landowners does not remove the cost,
it simply transfers it onto them.
Finally, just quickly in terms of allocation
of natural resources, um,
while the natural environment bill basically retains the
current first and first served approach over time,
it does allow options towards market-based mechanisms.
And, and we're strongly supportive of this,
but there's several principles
that need to be considered here.
Firstly, security around property rights.
Um, and I think that's been raised by earlier submitters.
Now resource users need permits of significant duration
to support investment.
Second specification, clear specification of resource use,
constraints need to be well-defined, publicly known,
and not subject to arbitrary change.
Thirdly, transferability the ability to trade, um,
and say water rights is essential
for efficient allocation over time
and it allows resources to move to the highest valued use.
It is important that existing users
of natural resources are fully consulted on new allocation
frameworks, particularly in terms of long-term investments
and sunk assets that are already in place.
So in summary, we support the overall direction
of the reforms, although there are a number of issues there
that require fur further work.
Um, thank you and I'm happy to answer any questions.
Thank you very much, John.
Look, we've got a first question from LA Farm.
Thank you so much for your submission.
Um, I wanted to pick up on your comments around
regulatory relief and, you know,
we've heard particularly from councils,
but a number of submitters that
regulatory relief in itself could result in like a chilling
effect on councils actually putting in place, say
for example, biodiversity protections.
Um, and, and the reason that we are given
for this is particularly when it comes
to the biodiversity space, um, it could be very expensive
to actually determine, um, what the
actual impact on a property by property basis might be.
Do you think if, you know,
essentially councils were disincentivized
and it ended up being the case
that they didn't put in place, say for example,
biodiversity protections, do you think that would be, um,
generally a good thing
where basically development might be able to go ahead
where perhaps biodiversity was lost?
Well, I think, um, my earlier point that, um,
not compensating landowners
doesn't actually get rid of the cost.
It simply transfers it from the council rate payers.
I guess what we're saying is that in order to make, um,
good decisions, people should be fully aware
of the costs and benefits.
So if you look at a significant natural area,
is it really significantly na a significant natural area
or is it something that desirable?
And generally, if you don't have to pay for the costs, yeah.
Um, you're happy to, to slap them onto another party.
So what we're saying that should be hopefully transparent
and where you wanna make those decisions, you would consult
with your rate payers.
This is, this is the pros
and cons, hopefully the costs and benefits.
Um, do you want this? And, and that's across the board.
Um, so we're not saying, look, we want to get rid
of biodiversity, but the the actual decision making is
transparent so people actually aware, um, of, of the costs
and benefits of of particular decisions.
And, um, where it makes sense,
well compensate the private landowner where, where it's um,
uh, you know, and there's also things probably under like
the regulatory standards bill that probably
support this sort of approach anyway as well.
So hopefully that answers.
Yeah. Thank you. Can I ask another question here?
Yeah. We've just got a few
more questions and then I'll hoop back.
Uh, LAN, so we've got grant McCullum.
Yeah. You, you've talked about the, um, uh,
the market allocation where makes the most efficient place.
This has come up in particular concerns in, um,
for example around water.
Mm-hmm. Um, and the, the potential for people to,
for a larger holdings to literally take hold of that water
and hang onto it and control it.
What's your comments to that?
Well, it, it's, it's probably actually say
it's gonna be a huge, if
hypothetically that was the case, yeah, sure.
It's gonna cost you. It's a bit like, um,
I haven't got the money, but if I said, look,
I'm gonna buy half of Wellington's houses
and I'm gonna leave them empty. Yeah.
But to be fair that this happened in Australia,
yeah, this is exactly what
Happened in Australia. So
if it's a valuable property, right,
people will actually buy that.
So it reflects the, the market value.
So, um,
technically it's no different from any other people trying
to hog any other resources that will come at a cost.
Um, and we, you're free to trade.
So I think one of the problems in New Zealand under the
first and first served model is you're incentivized to try
and get as much as you can upfront
because, you know, you can't, it's very, very difficult
to transfer and trade that if it's freely
available to be traded.
Um, unless you're totally irrational, you have incentives
to either use that for an efficient purpose
or onsell it to someone else.
Um, you know, and if the value of that goes up
or down over time, that'll that'll be reflected in
your decision makings.
But it would be illogical to, um, try
and, you know, confiscate a resource
and just sit on it, um, for any, any length of time
Does happen.
Right. Thank you. Uh, Rachel Brooking has a question.
Thank you. And this is on the spatial planning.
You, uh, say that business should also
be involved in spatial planning.
Uh, and do you think just having spatial planning available
to everyone fixes the issue that you've
identified in your submission?
And then maybe if you can also say
how do you think if you were in charge of everything, um,
how, how would business best interact
with the spatial planning?
Yeah, I think the, um, the issue
with the spatial planning is
because it, it's a great concept.
We're we're, we're supportive of it.
Um, moving forward, the difficulty is where you are going
to be, or decision makers are gonna be making decisions
that might impact on current use.
So whether that's say agricultural land, dairy land,
and it could actually even come into the water
rights issue there as well.
So, um, when I talk broadly about business, it's,
it's important that affected parties
or those that are actually gonna be impacted on
actually have a seat at the table so
that their views are actually heard and recognized.
And so if it's a case of lock this area we're not gonna use
for dairy farming anymore, um,
that they actually have a say in that
and they're actually compensated
or they're aware of the abuse
because, I mean, coming back to your earlier point about,
um, compensation for regulatory takings,
if there's nothing on that,
well simply you can just simply ride rust out
and say in 10 years time, that's not gonna be allowed.
This is gonna be allowed, et cetera, et cetera.
So it's simply saying those that are affected parties, um,
allowed to be heard and their voice, um, um, heard
and that, so it's not only business,
it's a wide range of groups.
I think there's only, there's a few groups here allowed,
I think infrastructure, maybe local authority
and Maori interests I think currently.
Thank you. Look, Ryan Hamilton has a question.
Thanks. Um, in your submission you talk about, um,
undefined terms such as unreasonably affect others mm-hmm.
And inappropriate development.
Obviously the bill and draft has gone some way
to constrain those third party appeal rights and,
and up the hierarchy,
but you think there's still some ambiguity sitting in there?
Yeah, I, I think like, um, mentioned those,
um, you, what does unreasonably affect others?
I mean, it's a very, very broad concept
and I think, and I haven't got drafting advice on that,
but unreasonably affect others might be, you knows,
significantly impact on their ability
to carry up their day-to-day activities
to earn income from their business.
Um, and what is inappropriate developments
in the eyes of the beholder.
So inappropriate development might be where the significant
externalities that might impact on public
health or, or something.
So I think it needs a lot more structure on it.
And even though we didn't mention here in terms of like, um,
the national direction saying, talking about health effects,
even that, you know, needs to be clearly defined
'cause health effects can be from here to there,
it's gotta be substantial, you know?
Yeah. It's about risk, I guess.
So do you think that should sit in the primary legislation
or in the, in the,
I I think it would be better to be in primary legislation.
'cause I guess one of the other points
that I haven't raised in my oral presentation is the
potential for future governments, um, to, you know,
simply you could just change the sort of back in here.
So I think things clearly need to be science based to,
to the extent possible.
And so you've got a clear framework in there.
So if you are gonna change it in the future, it's sort of
really has to go through parliament
and be, uh, you can have those arguments
and debates I guess.
Yeah. Um, whereas if it's simply just sort
of left in some sort of framework for the minister
of the day, um, that, that they can change that the,
that their woman basically. Thank you.
Um, I'm just gonna jump in with a couple
of quick questions because I was interested in your
recommendation nine around future resource allocation
frameworks and, um, you do talk about a right
to use a natural resource and water is
provided with a suitable length permit.
Yeah. Is there anything that, um, any suitable links
that you were recommending?
Um, it's not business New Zealand policy,
but I guess, you know, you can look at Australia
for example, where you've actually given rights
and perpetuity with the ability to trade and transfer.
So in my view, things like, you know,
large irrigation schemes, hydro schemes, 35 years
for large sunk costs investments is,
is not nowhere near long enough.
Mm-hmm. Um,
and you know, there's 50 years, a hundred years,
it's if they were rolled over.
But I think the thing is, if you can try
and provide greater property rights for the use
of those resources and the ability to transfer
and trade them, you wouldn't need to have this issue of,
well, things come up 35 years, 20 years, 15 or whatever.
But I mean, certainly I think 35 years
and given them particularly under the RMA,
they're often a lot shorter than that is, is far too short
and uncertain to, to, to make major investments.
No, thank you. Um, yeah, no, that clarifies it.
'cause you also say that you think freshwater use should be
well-defined, publicly known
and not subject to arbitrary change, which is kind
of the point that you are making in terms
of creating business certainty and investment.
Yeah. Okay. Thank you.
And Lan we'll come to you for the last question.
Thank you. It's really just a follow on from the water use
and allocation topic
and wondering your thoughts on, you know,
often we have the situation where actually the on paper
allocation is much greater than the actual use
and that there are, you know,
have been attempts at least when councils
around the country are trying to call back allocation
that they're actually basing those decisions
on actual use rather than what's allocated on paper.
Do you support that as an approach?
Um, or, or do,
or are you saying the fact that these, um, water users
may have it even on paper about a water?
Right. Do you think that should be set succinct?
Yeah, there's, there's been interesting cases in Australia
and this where people literally had sleeper permits,
so they had them in their bottom drawer.
Um mm. But,
and that there's, there's no one right answer,
but I know for example there that they had, um, basically
contributions from federal government,
state government and actually users.
It's a bit like the, you know,
the fishing quota in New Zealand.
It's not a, it's a percentage of the quota,
it's not the actual actual amount.
But I think one of the things here
before we talk, you know,
when we're talking about over allocation,
over allocation in whose eyes
and in what circumstances, if you know, so, um,
once you start saying, look, you are using X amount of water
and someone else is using a lesser amount, um, doesn't mean
that that person that's using a whole lot
of water is actually, sort of sees writing in the wall.
So it's deliberately increasing their allocation use
of water, is it used efficiently, et cetera, et cetera.
So I'm very nervous about sort of treating, uh,
one person differently from, from, from another,
depending if I've been guaranteed.
It seems to be that that is a, for all intents
and purposes a property.
Right. Of sorts.
Look, thank you very much, John.
We're gonna have to wrap it up there. We've met time.
We, we appreciate your analysis. Thanks.
Feedback for us, a really good submission.
So thank you very much. Thank you
Very much. Yes.
Look, now we are moving on to our next submission,
the Y Cato Regional Airport Central Limited.
Uh, it's a bit of a, a morning for the,
the mighty y Cattle region.
Welcome to the select committee this morning.
Uh, you have 20 minutes with us, uh, so take your submission
as read, but we'll hand it over
to you to talk us through it.
Thank you, uh, and good afternoon chair
and, uh, committee members.
My name is Mark Morgan.
I am the CE of Waikato Regional Airport Limited,
the operator of Hamilton Airport
and Hereafter referred to as rail.
Um, I'm appearing with Rob Dole, our group GM Property
and Infrastructure, uh, at Hamilton Airport.
We thank the committee for the opportunity
to appear at this hearing.
We intend to briefly address you on rail
and the reasons for its broad support for the reform bills
and the stated aims
and outline rail's support for the submission
by the New Zealand Airports Association, noting
that rail's submission on the bills essentially supports the
New Zealand airport submission.
We will then address you on a targeted additional amendment
sought by RA being the automatic extension
of designation lapse periods during the transition.
Hamilton Airport commenced operation in the 1930s
as a flying paddock
and served as a military base during World War ii.
Today is a regionally
and nationally significant transport infrastructure
and commercial property hub,
which holds an important role in Waikato regional economy
in terms of passengers, logistics, and employment.
It is the fourth longest commercial runway in the country.
Browse operations and assets are governed by a range
of environmental approvals, including resource consents
and a suite of airport designations under the RMA.
The rail group therefore regularly interacts
with the resource management system in a range of contexts,
including as an airport operator for which the enabling
of infrastructure and supporting activities
and their ongoing protection, including from incompatible
sensitive, developed nearby is critical.
And secondly, as a property developer via Titanium Park
Limited, which is the developer of the high quality
master plan business park adjacent to Hamilton Airport,
for which the enabling of appropriate development
and effective and efficient approval processes is important.
Rail supports the key high level themes slash objectives
of the reform, which are stated as having been guided
by the objective of making it easier to get things done,
including specifically by enabling delivery
of high quality infrastructure
and its protection from incompatible uses, including
through infrastructure specific goals in the planning bill,
reducing the regulatory burden, including
by reducing the number of council plans
and streamlining the need for consents slash permits.
Also, finally, increasing consistency between plans
through greater standardization, enabling the establishment
of a clear set of rules under each bill to guide councils
and decision makers.
In rao's experience,
RMA processes have become increasingly complex,
time consuming, and very costly.
This has direct and practical implications
for New Zealand Inc.
As projects are delayed cost added
and there is uncertainty as to outcome.
The bills are a welcome recalibration.
Notwithstanding rails support
for the broad objectives of the reform.
The implementation of the bills will be critical.
Infrastructure and development goals may not be realized if
the tensions with competing goals are not appropriately
resolved through the system.
For example, it will be important
that environmental limits do not unduly restrict
infrastructure and development and that national direction
and combined plans appropriately provide for infrastructure
and development into the future.
These tensions are often at play at airports where the need
to enable and protect critical airport infrastructure
and future expansion can create tensions in terms
of the need to restrict other nearby development
and to manage effects on other environmental values.
In the above context, it is essential that the wording
of the bills appropriately enables
and protects infrastructure.
Setting the scene for the national direction
and plans to follow rail supports the New Zealand airport
submission, which covers a range of important matters.
We highlight the following key themes from it.
The country's airport network underpins domestic
and international connectivity, tourism, freight movement,
national resilience, emergency response,
and economic development, meaning that airports are central
to the planning and resource management system.
And vice versa Rail supports a more directive
and outcomes focused planning framework,
including stronger national direction
and better consideration of land use compatibility
through spatial planning, which has the potential
to increase certainty and improve infrastructure delivery.
The success of the reform will depend on whether the new
system, including future national direction
and plans, genuinely enables ongoing airport operations
and future airport development.
Clear protections for infrastructure are key.
The New Zealand airport submission provides a range
of recommendations,
including getting the foundations right,
recognizing the importance, benefits,
and constraints of infrastructure as a key priority.
This includes A, providing a clear definition
of infrastructure B, strengthening infrastructure goals,
and C, the careful development of national instruments
that actively resolve conflicts between goals
with infrastructure as a key priority.
Establishing spatial planning to do the heavy lifting,
including by requiring consultation with infrastructure
provided providers such as airports in the preparation
of regional spatial plans, recognizing current
and future operational requirements
and constraints of airports
and clearly separating incompatible land uses.
And finally, protecting infrastructure,
including preserving the central role of designations and,
and applying environmental limits in the way
that is workable for infrastructure.
Rail seeks the automatic extension
of designation lapse periods during the transition
rail holds a suite of airport designations covering a range
of important airport operations.
The continued effective function of designations
and related processes under the new system is
therefore key to Hamilton Airport's continuing operation
and expansion rail is in the process of seeking extensions
to the last period of several of RA's airport designations
to ensure they do not lapse later in 2026.
RAO broadly supports the approach the bills take
with respect to designations.
RA also generally supports the range of recommended changes
to the designation provisions contained in the N City
airport's submission,
which will implo improve clarity and workability.
There is one additional change to the designation provisions
that is important to R LRA considers that designations
that are due to lapse within the transition period should
have the elapsed states automatically extended.
The reasons support the reason supporting this change are
similar to those supporting the proposal
and the bills to automatically extend the duration
of expiring resource consents.
Designations routinely underpin important long-term
infrastructure and investment, often with long, complex,
costly and involved lead in times
automatically extending the lapse period
for designations due
to lapse in the transition period would provide additional
valuable certainty and flexibility
for designation holders including rail.
It would also be efficient, avoiding the need for the time
and cost of making designation lapse period extension
applications during the initial stages
of a complex transition to a new resource management system.
As is the case for the proposal
and the bills to extend the duration
of expiring resource consents, RAO considers
that overall impacts for third parties in terms
of designations persisting
for longer than initially expected are outweighed
by the benefits for the designation holders overall,
automatically extending designation lapse periods would
better reflect and accommodate the realities
of implementing large and complex infrastructure projects
and would promote consistency, fairness,
and an orderly transition to the new framework.
If this change is made, it is important
that designation holders should explicitly have the ability
to apply to further extend laps periods at any time
before the end of the automatically extended period.
That completes our prepared material
and we're happy to take any questions. Mm-hmm.
Brilliant. Thank you very much for that submission
and for your insights.
Uh, we'll take the first question from the MP
and your region, uh, Ryan Hamilton.
Thanks. Good day, mark.
And Rob, thanks for making the travel down.
Um, just on that designation extension,
do you think it's an oversight in the bill?
And my other question is are there any other entities in a
similar position that you think caught up in that situation?
Yeah, we have a, yeah,
I do think it's an oversight in the bill.
And then, um, you know, we have a designation lapsing during
that transition period, so we are caught up in that
and we do think it should be extended.
And I, I would assume there is other entities
around the country that have in a similar situation as us.
Thank you. And Grant McCallum?
Yeah, it's been highlighted by, actually by just ahead
of you, the, or earlier on the Port of Auckland, the, um,
the lining up averse consents and designations.
I mean, it, it just seems almost nonsensical to have,
you've got an operation
and you've got all these different
things coming up at different times.
If any one of them was refused
or changed, uh, to a really, in a really, in a way
that would potentially make business doing business really,
really hard, could um, um, skittle the whole show?
Um, any comment on that?
Well, I, I think you're absolutely right.
I mean, I think, uh, if we look at the designations we hold,
it allows the extension of the runway
and the associated air noise boundary, uh, requirements, um,
under that designation.
Um, so IG yes, I, I guess this
somewhat f has the potential
to further con confuse that process.
And I think we also, if I could indulge you,
give you a great example previously where we were caught,
uh, under a legislation change. And
Yes, when we did the plan change for our latest part
of our industrial development,
we had two national policy statements that came into effect.
One within 24 hours of the appeal notice finishing,
and we had a, um, an appeal from a government agency,
which cost us another a hundred, uh, $500,000
and six months to our plan change process.
And the comment was, we didn't give effect to
that national policy statement,
which is a little bit unfair since we are in a year
into that process already.
Mm. I suppose just in, in terms of the, the whole consent,
like, you know, when the, the consent to operate
over various things, um, uh, what sort of length
of consents do you normally get?
Uh, has, has historically the
designations have been, I'm sorry, if you
Get designations as opposed to consent to that?
Well, depending which part of the,
the business we're operating,
and if it's in the airport, uh,
it's principally via designations.
And then of course, the operation
of the airport is under the district plan.
I see. Um, further complicated for Hamilton Airport,
'cause we operate under three councils, district plans
that all intercede the airport.
So we have, yes.
So we have the complexity of managing three,
three district plans, um, as well as our designations.
Yeah. So it's complex.
I think the RMA traditionally hasn't necessarily when it
was first drafted, and look,
New Zealand Inc has come a long way.
I mean, critical infrastructure to New Zealand airports,
ports, you know, they really need to be considered at,
at a much more long term view, 50 to a hundred year horizons
Mm-hmm. Hydro deems. Mm-hmm.
We're at the moment, they don't necessarily,
they don't under an RA process.
Mm-hmm. Um, Ryan's got a supplementary on
that. Thanks. Obviously
Some good news in the last couple weeks
around OIA in terms of resilience,
but you guys, as I understand it also could play into
that resilience network for New Zealand Inc.
Yes. Look, I think Peter's, um, uh,
we're still the fastest growing.
We No Worries. They still couldn't make femoral
Work.
But, but look, I think everyone,
I think there's an awareness, um, and,
and certainly, uh, of the growing importance
of the upper North Island, whilst
that awareness has always been there.
I think the, the population drift into
the upper North Island.
Uh, some of the, uh, weather patterns
that are certainly sweeping through
and affecting Northland, Auckland Bay, plenty East Cape,
but often fortunately, uh, we miss the worst effects
of those in the Waikato.
And I think we have a role to play, uh,
not only the airport,
but I think the region has a role to play in
that resilience piece.
And I think everyone agrees that having infrastructure
that can support those one-off events, um,
and our current designation would allow us to,
to further expand our influence in that area.
Just on the, you know, the fastest growing
and obviously you talk about in your submission
that you're going from 2 350 6,000 passengers
to 600,000 annually, but huge, yes.
Huge increase. Yes. Um, have you done any kind of economic
analysis in terms of the, the benefit of, you know,
faster consenting, more streamlining, um,
and, you know, a better RMA system that could potentially,
you know, benefit and handle the, the number
and volume of passengers that are gonna be coming
through your critical infrastructure?
Well, look, I think there's a, we haven't turned, we know
that the two international services we have at the moment
add about $50 million of economic benefit
to the region per annum.
Uh, and, uh, there's no, there's no question that
as we grow further, uh,
and we would expect, um, our passenger numbers
to near a million, within five years.
Wow. Um, so the growth is significant.
That requires, um, activation of parts of our designations
that will require, uh, increased in, uh,
terminal infrastructure, uh, aeronautical infrastructure.
So, um, the risk for us is
that our growth is constrained
because we, the,
the processes can't keep up with the opportunity.
That's probably what worries us.
Mm-hmm. Okay.
No, that's a, um, really good point to end on actually.
So thank you very much for your submission today.
Uh, really interesting to get a airport perspective, uh,
from the fastest growing region.
Just in terms, We just heard
It a few times in terms of Resiliency.
Can you just something about the fog when
we go to Mystery Creek, it's
Not so Oh yeah.
Field days, it's only one or two days a year.
Always coincides.
Look, it does, you can,
you can always put the weather map by
Look. Thank you for your,
your submission very much.
Uh, that ends our morning session members,
so we will resume at one o'clock at.